THE GOLDEN BIRD

A certain king had a beautiful garden, and in the garden stood a tree
which bore golden apples. These apples were always counted, and about
the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one
of them was gone. The king became very angry at this, and ordered the
gardener to keep watch all night under the tree. The gardener set his
eldest son to watch; but about twelve o’clock he fell asleep, and in
the morning another of the apples was missing. Then the second son was
ordered to watch; and at midnight he too fell asleep, and in the morning
another apple was gone. Then the third son offered to keep watch; but
the gardener at first would not let him, for fear some harm should come
to him: however, at last he consented, and the young man laid himself
under the tree to watch. As the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling
noise in the air, and a bird came flying that was of pure gold; and as
it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak, the gardener’s son
jumped up and shot an arrow at it. But the arrow did the bird no harm;
only it dropped a golden feather from its tail, and then flew away.
The golden feather was brought to the king in the morning, and all the
council was called together. Everyone agreed that it was worth more than
all the wealth of the kingdom: but the king said, ‘One feather is of no
use to me, I must have the whole bird.’

Then the gardener’s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden
bird very easily; and when he had gone but a little way, he came to a
wood, and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting; so he took his
bow and made ready to shoot at it. Then the fox said, ‘Do not shoot me,
for I will give you good counsel; I know what your business is, and
that you want to find the golden bird. You will reach a village in the
evening; and when you get there, you will see two inns opposite to each
other, one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at: go not in
there, but rest for the night in the other, though it may appear to you
to be very poor and mean.’ But the son thought to himself, ‘What can
such a beast as this know about the matter?’ So he shot his arrow at
the fox; but he missed it, and it set up its tail above its back and
ran into the wood. Then he went his way, and in the evening came to
the village where the two inns were; and in one of these were people
singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the other looked very dirty,
and poor. ‘I should be very silly,’ said he, ‘if I went to that shabby
house, and left this charming place’; so he went into the smart house,
and ate and drank at his ease, and forgot the bird, and his country too.

Time passed on; and as the eldest son did not come back, and no tidings
were heard of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happened
to him. He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came
to the two inns, his eldest brother was standing at the window where
the merrymaking was, and called to him to come in; and he could not
withstand the temptation, but went in, and forgot the golden bird and
his country in the same manner.

Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into
the wide world to seek for the golden bird; but his father would not
listen to it for a long while, for he was very fond of his son, and
was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also, and prevent his
coming back. However, at last it was agreed he should go, for he would
not rest at home; and as he came to the wood, he met the fox, and heard
the same good counsel. But he was thankful to the fox, and did not
attempt his life as his brothers had done; so the fox said, ‘Sit upon my
tail, and you will travel faster.’ So he sat down, and the fox began to
run, and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair
whistled in the wind.

When they came to the village, the son followed the fox’s counsel, and
without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all
night at his ease. In the morning came the fox again and met him as he
was beginning his journey, and said, ‘Go straight forward, till you come
to a castle, before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and
snoring: take no notice of them, but go into the castle and pass on and
on till you come to a room, where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage;
close by it stands a beautiful golden cage; but do not try to take the
bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one, otherwise
you will repent it.’ Then the fox stretched out his tail again, and the
young man sat himself down, and away they went over stock and stone till
their hair whistled in the wind.

Before the castle gate all was as the fox had said: so the son went in
and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage, and
below stood the golden cage, and the three golden apples that had been
lost were lying close by it. Then thought he to himself, ‘It will be a
very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage’; so
he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage.
But the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke, and
they took him prisoner and carried him before the king. The next morning
the court sat to judge him; and when all was heard, it sentenced him to
die, unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as
swiftly as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the golden bird
given him for his own.

So he set out once more on his journey, sighing, and in great despair,
when on a sudden his friend the fox met him, and said, ‘You see now
what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel. I will
still, however, tell you how to find the golden horse, if you will do as
I bid you. You must go straight on till you come to the castle where the
horse stands in his stall: by his side will lie the groom fast asleep
and snoring: take away the horse quietly, but be sure to put the old
leathern saddle upon him, and not the golden one that is close by it.’
Then the son sat down on the fox’s tail, and away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled in the wind.

All went right, and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden
saddle. But when the son looked at the horse, he thought it a great pity
to put the leathern saddle upon it. ‘I will give him the good one,’
said he; ‘I am sure he deserves it.’ As he took up the golden saddle the
groom awoke and cried out so loud, that all the guards ran in and took
him prisoner, and in the morning he was again brought before the court
to be judged, and was sentenced to die. But it was agreed, that, if he
could bring thither the beautiful princess, he should live, and have the
bird and the horse given him for his own.

Then he went his way very sorrowful; but the old fox came and said, ‘Why
did not you listen to me? If you had, you would have carried away
both the bird and the horse; yet will I once more give you counsel. Go
straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle. At twelve
o’clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house: go up to her
and give her a kiss, and she will let you lead her away; but take care
you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother.’
Then the fox stretched out his tail, and so away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled again.

As they came to the castle, all was as the fox had said, and at twelve
o’clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the
kiss, and she agreed to run away with him, but begged with many tears
that he would let her take leave of her father. At first he refused,
but she wept still more and more, and fell at his feet, till at last
he consented; but the moment she came to her father’s house the guards
awoke and he was taken prisoner again.

Then he was brought before the king, and the king said, ‘You shall never
have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops
the view from my window.’ Now this hill was so big that the whole world
could not take it away: and when he had worked for seven days, and had
done very little, the fox came and said. ‘Lie down and go to sleep; I
will work for you.’ And in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone;
so he went merrily to the king, and told him that now that it was
removed he must give him the princess.

Then the king was obliged to keep his word, and away went the young man
and the princess; and the fox came and said to him, ‘We will have all
three, the princess, the horse, and the bird.’ ‘Ah!’ said the young man,
‘that would be a great thing, but how can you contrive it?’

‘If you will only listen,’ said the fox, ‘it can be done. When you come
to the king, and he asks for the beautiful princess, you must say, “Here
she is!” Then he will be very joyful; and you will mount the golden
horse that they are to give you, and put out your hand to take leave of
them; but shake hands with the princess last. Then lift her quickly on
to the horse behind you; clap your spurs to his side, and gallop away as
fast as you can.’

All went right: then the fox said, ‘When you come to the castle where
the bird is, I will stay with the princess at the door, and you will
ride in and speak to the king; and when he sees that it is the right
horse, he will bring out the bird; but you must sit still, and say that
you want to look at it, to see whether it is the true golden bird; and
when you get it into your hand, ride away.’

This, too, happened as the fox said; they carried off the bird, the
princess mounted again, and they rode on to a great wood. Then the fox
came, and said, ‘Pray kill me, and cut off my head and my feet.’ But the
young man refused to do it: so the fox said, ‘I will at any rate give
you good counsel: beware of two things; ransom no one from the gallows,
and sit down by the side of no river.’ Then away he went. ‘Well,’
thought the young man, ‘it is no hard matter to keep that advice.’

He rode on with the princess, till at last he came to the village where
he had left his two brothers. And there he heard a great noise and
uproar; and when he asked what was the matter, the people said, ‘Two men
are going to be hanged.’ As he came nearer, he saw that the two men were
his brothers, who had turned robbers; so he said, ‘Cannot they in any
way be saved?’ But the people said ‘No,’ unless he would bestow all his
money upon the rascals and buy their liberty. Then he did not stay to
think about the matter, but paid what was asked, and his brothers were
given up, and went on with him towards their home.

And as they came to the wood where the fox first met them, it was so
cool and pleasant that the two brothers said, ‘Let us sit down by the
side of the river, and rest a while, to eat and drink.’ So he said,
‘Yes,’ and forgot the fox’s counsel, and sat down on the side of the
river; and while he suspected nothing, they came behind, and threw him
down the bank, and took the princess, the horse, and the bird, and went
home to the king their master, and said. ‘All this have we won by our
labour.’ Then there was great rejoicing made; but the horse would not
eat, the bird would not sing, and the princess wept.

The youngest son fell to the bottom of the river’s bed: luckily it was
nearly dry, but his bones were almost broken, and the bank was so steep
that he could find no way to get out. Then the old fox came once more,
and scolded him for not following his advice; otherwise no evil would
have befallen him: ‘Yet,’ said he, ‘I cannot leave you here, so lay hold
of my tail and hold fast.’ Then he pulled him out of the river, and said
to him, as he got upon the bank, ‘Your brothers have set watch to kill
you, if they find you in the kingdom.’ So he dressed himself as a poor
man, and came secretly to the king’s court, and was scarcely within the
doors when the horse began to eat, and the bird to sing, and the princess
left off weeping. Then he went to the king, and told him all his
brothers’ roguery; and they were seized and punished, and he had the
princess given to him again; and after the king’s death he was heir to
his kingdom.

A long while after, he went to walk one day in the wood, and the old fox
met him, and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him, and cut
off his head and feet. And at last he did so, and in a moment the
fox was changed into a man, and turned out to be the brother of the
princess, who had been lost a great many many years.




HANS IN LUCK

Some men are born to good luck: all they do or try to do comes
right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are
swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will, they
will always, like poor puss, alight upon their legs, and only move on so
much the faster. The world may very likely not always think of them as
they think of themselves, but what care they for the world? what can it
know about the matter?

One of these lucky beings was neighbour Hans. Seven long years he had
worked hard for his master. At last he said, ‘Master, my time is up; I
must go home and see my poor mother once more: so pray pay me my wages
and let me go.’ And the master said, ‘You have been a faithful and good
servant, Hans, so your pay shall be handsome.’ Then he gave him a lump
of silver as big as his head.

Hans took out his pocket-handkerchief, put the piece of silver into it,
threw it over his shoulder, and jogged off on his road homewards. As he
went lazily on, dragging one foot after another, a man came in sight,
trotting gaily along on a capital horse. ‘Ah!’ said Hans aloud, ‘what a
fine thing it is to ride on horseback! There he sits as easy and happy
as if he was at home, in the chair by his fireside; he trips against no
stones, saves shoe-leather, and gets on he hardly knows how.’ Hans did
not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all, and said, ‘Well,
friend, why do you go on foot then?’ ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘I have this load to
carry: to be sure it is silver, but it is so heavy that I can’t hold up
my head, and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly.’ ‘What do you say
of making an exchange?’ said the horseman. ‘I will give you my horse,
and you shall give me the silver; which will save you a great deal of
trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said Hans: ‘but as you are so kind to me, I must tell you one
thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you.’
However, the horseman got off, took the silver, helped Hans up, gave him
the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other, and said, ‘When
you want to go very fast, smack your lips loudly together, and cry
“Jip!”’

Hans was delighted as he sat on the horse, drew himself up, squared his
elbows, turned out his toes, cracked his whip, and rode merrily off, one
minute whistling a merry tune, and another singing,

 ‘No care and no sorrow,
  A fig for the morrow!
  We’ll laugh and be merry,
  Sing neigh down derry!’

After a time he thought he should like to go a little faster, so he
smacked his lips and cried ‘Jip!’ Away went the horse full gallop; and
before Hans knew what he was about, he was thrown off, and lay on his
back by the road-side. His horse would have ran off, if a shepherd who
was coming by, driving a cow, had not stopped it. Hans soon came to
himself, and got upon his legs again, sadly vexed, and said to the
shepherd, ‘This riding is no joke, when a man has the luck to get upon
a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break
his neck. However, I’m off now once for all: I like your cow now a great
deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick, and has
spoiled my best coat, you see, in this puddle; which, by the by, smells
not very like a nosegay. One can walk along at one’s leisure behind that
cow--keep good company, and have milk, butter, and cheese, every day,
into the bargain. What would I give to have such a prize!’ ‘Well,’ said
the shepherd, ‘if you are so fond of her, I will change my cow for your
horse; I like to do good to my neighbours, even though I lose by it
myself.’ ‘Done!’ said Hans, merrily. ‘What a noble heart that good man
has!’ thought he. Then the shepherd jumped upon the horse, wished Hans
and the cow good morning, and away he rode.

Hans brushed his coat, wiped his face and hands, rested a while, and
then drove off his cow quietly, and thought his bargain a very lucky
one. ‘If I have only a piece of bread (and I certainly shall always be
able to get that), I can, whenever I like, eat my butter and cheese with
it; and when I am thirsty I can milk my cow and drink the milk: and what
can I wish for more?’ When he came to an inn, he halted, ate up all his
bread, and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer. When he had
rested himself he set off again, driving his cow towards his mother’s
village. But the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on, till at
last, as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than
an hour to cross, he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue
clave to the roof of his mouth. ‘I can find a cure for this,’ thought
he; ‘now I will milk my cow and quench my thirst’: so he tied her to the
stump of a tree, and held his leathern cap to milk into; but not a drop
was to be had. Who would have thought that this cow, which was to bring
him milk and butter and cheese, was all that time utterly dry? Hans had
not thought of looking to that.

While he was trying his luck in milking, and managing the matter very
clumsily, the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome; and at
last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down; and there he
lay a long while senseless. Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a
pig in a wheelbarrow. ‘What is the matter with you, my man?’ said the
butcher, as he helped him up. Hans told him what had happened, how he
was dry, and wanted to milk his cow, but found the cow was dry too. Then
the butcher gave him a flask of ale, saying, ‘There, drink and refresh
yourself; your cow will give you no milk: don’t you see she is an old
beast, good for nothing but the slaughter-house?’ ‘Alas, alas!’ said
Hans, ‘who would have thought it? What a shame to take my horse, and
give me only a dry cow! If I kill her, what will she be good for? I hate
cow-beef; it is not tender enough for me. If it were a pig now--like
that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do
something with it; it would at any rate make sausages.’ ‘Well,’ said
the butcher, ‘I don’t like to say no, when one is asked to do a kind,
neighbourly thing. To please you I will change, and give you my fine fat
pig for the cow.’ ‘Heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial!’
said Hans, as he gave the butcher the cow; and taking the pig off the
wheel-barrow, drove it away, holding it by the string that was tied to
its leg.

So on he jogged, and all seemed now to go right with him: he had met
with some misfortunes, to be sure; but he was now well repaid for all.
How could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at
last got?

The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose. The
countryman stopped to ask what was o’clock; this led to further chat;
and Hans told him all his luck, how he had so many good bargains, and
how all the world went gay and smiling with him. The countryman then
began to tell his tale, and said he was going to take the goose to a
christening. ‘Feel,’ said he, ‘how heavy it is, and yet it is only eight
weeks old. Whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it,
it has lived so well!’ ‘You’re right,’ said Hans, as he weighed it in
his hand; ‘but if you talk of fat, my pig is no trifle.’ Meantime the
countryman began to look grave, and shook his head. ‘Hark ye!’ said he,
‘my worthy friend, you seem a good sort of fellow, so I can’t help doing
you a kind turn. Your pig may get you into a scrape. In the village I
just came from, the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty. I was
dreadfully afraid when I saw you that you had got the squire’s pig. If
you have, and they catch you, it will be a bad job for you. The least
they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond. Can you swim?’

Poor Hans was sadly frightened. ‘Good man,’ cried he, ‘pray get me out
of this scrape. I know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born;
but he may have been the squire’s for aught I can tell: you know this
country better than I do, take my pig and give me the goose.’ ‘I ought
to have something into the bargain,’ said the countryman; ‘give a fat
goose for a pig, indeed! ‘Tis not everyone would do so much for you as
that. However, I will not be hard upon you, as you are in trouble.’ Then
he took the string in his hand, and drove off the pig by a side path;
while Hans went on the way homewards free from care. ‘After all,’
thought he, ‘that chap is pretty well taken in. I don’t care whose pig
it is, but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me. I
have much the best of the bargain. First there will be a capital roast;
then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months; and then there
are all the beautiful white feathers. I will put them into my pillow,
and then I am sure I shall sleep soundly without rocking. How happy my
mother will be! Talk of a pig, indeed! Give me a fine fat goose.’

As he came to the next village, he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel,
working and singing,

 ‘O’er hill and o’er dale
  So happy I roam,
  Work light and live well,
  All the world is my home;
  Then who so blythe, so merry as I?’

Hans stood looking on for a while, and at last said, ‘You must be well
off, master grinder! you seem so happy at your work.’ ‘Yes,’ said the
other, ‘mine is a golden trade; a good grinder never puts his hand
into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that
beautiful goose?’ ‘I did not buy it, I gave a pig for it.’ ‘And where
did you get the pig?’ ‘I gave a cow for it.’ ‘And the cow?’ ‘I gave a
horse for it.’ ‘And the horse?’ ‘I gave a lump of silver as big as my
head for it.’ ‘And the silver?’ ‘Oh! I worked hard for that seven long
years.’ ‘You have thriven well in the world hitherto,’ said the grinder,
‘now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand
in it, your fortune would be made.’ ‘Very true: but how is that to be
managed?’ ‘How? Why, you must turn grinder like myself,’ said the other;
‘you only want a grindstone; the rest will come of itself. Here is one
that is but little the worse for wear: I would not ask more than the
value of your goose for it--will you buy?’ ‘How can you ask?’ said
Hans; ‘I should be the happiest man in the world, if I could have money
whenever I put my hand in my pocket: what could I want more? there’s
the goose.’ ‘Now,’ said the grinder, as he gave him a common rough stone
that lay by his side, ‘this is a most capital stone; do but work it well
enough, and you can make an old nail cut with it.’

Hans took the stone, and went his way with a light heart: his eyes
sparkled for joy, and he said to himself, ‘Surely I must have been born
in a lucky hour; everything I could want or wish for comes of itself.
People are so kind; they seem really to think I do them a favour in
letting them make me rich, and giving me good bargains.’

Meantime he began to be tired, and hungry too, for he had given away his
last penny in his joy at getting the cow.

At last he could go no farther, for the stone tired him sadly: and he
dragged himself to the side of a river, that he might take a drink of
water, and rest a while. So he laid the stone carefully by his side on
the bank: but, as he stooped down to drink, he forgot it, pushed it a
little, and down it rolled, plump into the stream.

For a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water; then sprang
up and danced for joy, and again fell upon his knees and thanked Heaven,
with tears in his eyes, for its kindness in taking away his only plague,
the ugly heavy stone.

‘How happy am I!’ cried he; ‘nobody was ever so lucky as I.’ Then up he
got with a light heart, free from all his troubles, and walked on till
he reached his mother’s house, and told her how very easy the road to
good luck was.




JORINDA AND JORINDEL

There was once an old castle, that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy
wood, and in the castle lived an old fairy. Now this fairy could take
any shape she pleased. All the day long she flew about in the form of
an owl, or crept about the country like a cat; but at night she always
became an old woman again. When any young man came within a hundred
paces of her castle, he became quite fixed, and could not move a step
till she came and set him free; which she would not do till he had given
her his word never to come there again: but when any pretty maiden came
within that space she was changed into a bird, and the fairy put her
into a cage, and hung her up in a chamber in the castle. There were
seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle, and all with
beautiful birds in them.

Now there was once a maiden whose name was Jorinda. She was prettier
than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before, and a shepherd
lad, whose name was Jorindel, was very fond of her, and they were soon
to be married. One day they went to walk in the wood, that they might be
alone; and Jorindel said, ‘We must take care that we don’t go too near
to the fairy’s castle.’ It was a beautiful evening; the last rays of the
setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon
the green underwood beneath, and the turtle-doves sang from the tall
birches.

Jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jorindel sat by her side; and
both felt sad, they knew not why; but it seemed as if they were to be
parted from one another for ever. They had wandered a long way; and when
they looked to see which way they should go home, they found themselves
at a loss to know what path to take.

The sun was setting fast, and already half of its circle had sunk behind
the hill: Jorindel on a sudden looked behind him, and saw through the
bushes that they had, without knowing it, sat down close under the old
walls of the castle. Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
Jorinda was just singing,

 ‘The ring-dove sang from the willow spray,
  Well-a-day! Well-a-day!
  He mourn’d for the fate of his darling mate,
  Well-a-day!’

when her song stopped suddenly. Jorindel turned to see the reason, and
beheld his Jorinda changed into a nightingale, so that her song ended
with a mournful _jug, jug_. An owl with fiery eyes flew three times
round them, and three times screamed:

 ‘Tu whu! Tu whu! Tu whu!’

Jorindel could not move; he stood fixed as a stone, and could neither
weep, nor speak, nor stir hand or foot. And now the sun went quite down;
the gloomy night came; the owl flew into a bush; and a moment after the
old fairy came forth pale and meagre, with staring eyes, and a nose and
chin that almost met one another.

She mumbled something to herself, seized the nightingale, and went away
with it in her hand. Poor Jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but
what could he do? He could not speak, he could not move from the spot
where he stood. At last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse
voice:

 ‘Till the prisoner is fast,
  And her doom is cast,
  There stay! Oh, stay!
  When the charm is around her,
  And the spell has bound her,
  Hie away! away!’

On a sudden Jorindel found himself free. Then he fell on his knees
before the fairy, and prayed her to give him back his dear Jorinda: but
she laughed at him, and said he should never see her again; then she
went her way.

He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘what
will become of me?’ He could not go back to his own home, so he went to
a strange village, and employed himself in keeping sheep. Many a time
did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go,
but all in vain; he heard or saw nothing of Jorinda.

At last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower,
and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl; and he dreamt that he
plucked the flower, and went with it in his hand into the castle, and
that everything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that there he
found his Jorinda again.

In the morning when he awoke, he began to search over hill and dale for
this pretty flower; and eight long days he sought for it in vain: but
on the ninth day, early in the morning, he found the beautiful purple
flower; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop, as big as a costly
pearl. Then he plucked the flower, and set out and travelled day and
night, till he came again to the castle.

He walked nearer than a hundred paces to it, and yet he did not become
fixed as before, but found that he could go quite close up to the door.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this. Then he touched the door with
the flower, and it sprang open; so that he went in through the court,
and listened when he heard so many birds singing. At last he came to the
chamber where the fairy sat, with the seven hundred birds singing in
the seven hundred cages. When she saw Jorindel she was very angry, and
screamed with rage; but she could not come within two yards of him, for
the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard. He looked around at
the birds, but alas! there were many, many nightingales, and how then
should he find out which was his Jorinda? While he was thinking what to
do, he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages, and was making the
best of her way off through the door. He ran or flew after her, touched
the cage with the flower, and Jorinda stood before him, and threw her
arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever, as beautiful as when
they walked together in the wood.

Then he touched all the other birds with the flower, so that they all
took their old forms again; and he took Jorinda home, where they were
married, and lived happily together many years: and so did a good many
other lads, whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy’s
cages by themselves, much longer than they liked.




THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS

An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him
a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more
unfit for work. His master therefore was tired of keeping him and
began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off, and began his journey
towards the great city, ‘For there,’ thought he, ‘I may turn musician.’

After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the
roadside and panting as if he were tired. ‘What makes you pant so, my
friend?’ said the ass. ‘Alas!’ said the dog, ‘my master was going to
knock me on the head, because I am old and weak, and can no longer make
myself useful to him in hunting; so I ran away; but what can I do to
earn my livelihood?’ ‘Hark ye!’ said the ass, ‘I am going to the great
city to turn musician: suppose you go with me, and try what you can
do in the same way?’ The dog said he was willing, and they jogged on
together.

They had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the
road and making a most rueful face. ‘Pray, my good lady,’ said the ass,
‘what’s the matter with you? You look quite out of spirits!’ ‘Ah, me!’
said the cat, ‘how can one be in good spirits when one’s life is in
danger? Because I am beginning to grow old, and had rather lie at my
ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice, my mistress
laid hold of me, and was going to drown me; and though I have been lucky
enough to get away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon.’
‘Oh,’ said the ass, ‘by all means go with us to the great city; you are
a good night singer, and may make your fortune as a musician.’ The cat
was pleased with the thought, and joined the party.

Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock
perched upon a gate, and screaming out with all his might and main.
‘Bravo!’ said the ass; ‘upon my word, you make a famous noise; pray what
is all this about?’ ‘Why,’ said the cock, ‘I was just now saying that
we should have fine weather for our washing-day, and yet my mistress and
the cook don’t thank me for my pains, but threaten to cut off my
head tomorrow, and make broth of me for the guests that are coming
on Sunday!’ ‘Heaven forbid!’ said the ass, ‘come with us Master
Chanticleer; it will be better, at any rate, than staying here to have
your head cut off! Besides, who knows? If we care to sing in tune, we
may get up some kind of a concert; so come along with us.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.

They could not, however, reach the great city the first day; so when
night came on, they went into a wood to sleep. The ass and the dog laid
themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the
branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he
should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to
his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to
see that everything was well. In doing this, he saw afar off something
bright and shining and calling to his companions said, ‘There must be a
house no great way off, for I see a light.’ ‘If that be the case,’ said
the ass, ‘we had better change our quarters, for our lodging is not the
best in the world!’ ‘Besides,’ added the dog, ‘I should not be the
worse for a bone or two, or a bit of meat.’ So they walked off together
towards the spot where Chanticleer had seen the light, and as they drew
near it became larger and brighter, till they at last came close to a
house in which a gang of robbers lived.

The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to the window and
peeped in. ‘Well, Donkey,’ said Chanticleer, ‘what do you see?’ ‘What
do I see?’ replied the ass. ‘Why, I see a table spread with all kinds of
good things, and robbers sitting round it making merry.’ ‘That would
be a noble lodging for us,’ said the cock. ‘Yes,’ said the ass, ‘if we
could only get in’; so they consulted together how they should contrive
to get the robbers out; and at last they hit upon a plan. The ass placed
himself upright on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the
window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to the dog’s
shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat’s head. When
all was ready a signal was given, and they began their music. The ass
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and then
they all broke through the window at once, and came tumbling into
the room, amongst the broken glass, with a most hideous clatter! The
robbers, who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert,
had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them,
and scampered away as fast as they could.

The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what
the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected
to eat again for a month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-place to
his own liking. The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in
the yard, the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door, the
cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the
cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all
rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.

But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were
out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than
the rest, went to see what was going on. Finding everything still, he
marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he found a match in
order to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of
the cat, he mistook them for live coals, and held the match to them to
light it. But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face,
and spat, and scratched at him. This frightened him dreadfully, and away
he ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the
leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might. At
this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades, and told
the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house, and had spat at
him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man with a
knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door, and stabbed him
in the leg; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a
club, and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
‘Throw the rascal up here!’ After this the robbers never dared to go
back to the house; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters
that they took up their abode there; and there they are, I dare say, at
this very day.




OLD SULTAN

A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was grown very old,
and had lost all his teeth. And one day when the shepherd and his wife
were standing together before the house the shepherd said, ‘I will shoot
old Sultan tomorrow morning, for he is of no use now.’ But his wife
said, ‘Pray let the poor faithful creature live; he has served us well a
great many years, and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of
his days.’ ‘But what can we do with him?’ said the shepherd, ‘he has not
a tooth in his head, and the thieves don’t care for him at all; to
be sure he has served us, but then he did it to earn his livelihood;
tomorrow shall be his last day, depend upon it.’

Poor Sultan, who was lying close by them, heard all that the shepherd
and his wife said to one another, and was very much frightened to think
tomorrow would be his last day; so in the evening he went to his good
friend the wolf, who lived in the wood, and told him all his sorrows,
and how his master meant to kill him in the morning. ‘Make yourself
easy,’ said the wolf, ‘I will give you some good advice. Your master,
you know, goes out every morning very early with his wife into the
field; and they take their little child with them, and lay it down
behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work. Now do you lie
down close by the child, and pretend to be watching it, and I will come
out of the wood and run away with it; you must run after me as fast as
you can, and I will let it drop; then you may carry it back, and they
will think you have saved their child, and will be so thankful to you
that they will take care of you as long as you live.’ The dog liked this
plan very well; and accordingly so it was managed. The wolf ran with the
child a little way; the shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan
soon overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his master
and mistress. Then the shepherd patted him on the head, and said, ‘Old
Sultan has saved our child from the wolf, and therefore he shall live
and be well taken care of, and have plenty to eat. Wife, go home, and
give him a good dinner, and let him have my old cushion to sleep on
as long as he lives.’ So from this time forward Sultan had all that he
could wish for.

Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and said, ‘Now, my
good fellow, you must tell no tales, but turn your head the other way
when I want to taste one of the old shepherd’s fine fat sheep.’ ‘No,’
said the Sultan; ‘I will be true to my master.’ However, the wolf
thought he was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel. But
Sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do; so he laid wait
for him behind the barn door, and when the wolf was busy looking out for
a good fat sheep, he had a stout cudgel laid about his back, that combed
his locks for him finely.

Then the wolf was very angry, and called Sultan ‘an old rogue,’ and
swore he would have his revenge. So the next morning the wolf sent the
boar to challenge Sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter. Now
Sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd’s old
three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and as the poor thing limped
along with some trouble, she stuck up her tail straight in the air.

The wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground; and when they
espied their enemies coming, and saw the cat’s long tail standing
straight in the air, they thought she was carrying a sword for Sultan to
fight with; and every time she limped, they thought she was picking up
a stone to throw at them; so they said they should not like this way of
fighting, and the boar lay down behind a bush, and the wolf jumped
up into a tree. Sultan and the cat soon came up, and looked about and
wondered that no one was there. The boar, however, had not quite hidden
himself, for his ears stuck out of the bush; and when he shook one of
them a little, the cat, seeing something move, and thinking it was a
mouse, sprang upon it, and bit and scratched it, so that the boar jumped
up and grunted, and ran away, roaring out, ‘Look up in the tree, there
sits the one who is to blame.’ So they looked up, and espied the wolf
sitting amongst the branches; and they called him a cowardly rascal,
and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of
himself, and had promised to be good friends again with old Sultan.




THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN

In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a dish
of beans and wanted to cook them. So she made a fire on her hearth, and
that it might burn the quicker, she lighted it with a handful of straw.
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, one dropped without her
observing it, and lay on the ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards
a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two. Then the straw
began and said: ‘Dear friends, from whence do you come here?’ The coal
replied: ‘I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escaped
by sheer force, my death would have been certain,--I should have been
burnt to ashes.’ The bean said: ‘I too have escaped with a whole skin,
but if the old woman had got me into the pan, I should have been made
into broth without any mercy, like my comrades.’ ‘And would a better
fate have fallen to my lot?’ said the straw. ‘The old woman has
destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke; she seized sixty of them at
once, and took their lives. I luckily slipped through her fingers.’

‘But what are we to do now?’ said the coal.

‘I think,’ answered the bean, ‘that as we have so fortunately escaped
death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest a new
mischance should overtake us here, we should go away together, and
repair to a foreign country.’

The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their way
together. Soon, however, they came to a little brook, and as there was
no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how they were to get over
it. The straw hit on a good idea, and said: ‘I will lay myself straight
across, and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge.’ The straw
therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other, and the coal,
who was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the
newly-built bridge. But when she had reached the middle, and heard the
water rushing beneath her, she was after all, afraid, and stood still,
and ventured no farther. The straw, however, began to burn, broke in
two pieces, and fell into the stream. The coal slipped after her, hissed
when she got into the water, and breathed her last. The bean, who had
prudently stayed behind on the shore, could not but laugh at the event,
was unable to stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst. It would
have been all over with her, likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who
was travelling in search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread,
and sewed her together. The bean thanked him most prettily, but as the
tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.




BRIAR ROSE

A king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off,
where there were in those days fairies. Now this king and queen had
plenty of money, and plenty of fine clothes to wear, and plenty of
good things to eat and drink, and a coach to ride out in every day: but
though they had been married many years they had no children, and this
grieved them very much indeed. But one day as the queen was walking
by the side of the river, at the bottom of the garden, she saw a poor
little fish, that had thrown itself out of the water, and lay gasping
and nearly dead on the bank. Then the queen took pity on the little
fish, and threw it back again into the river; and before it swam away
it lifted its head out of the water and said, ‘I know what your wish is,
and it shall be fulfilled, in return for your kindness to me--you will
soon have a daughter.’ What the little fish had foretold soon came to
pass; and the queen had a little girl, so very beautiful that the king
could not cease looking on it for joy, and said he would hold a great
feast and make merry, and show the child to all the land. So he asked
his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours. But the queen
said, ‘I will have the fairies also, that they might be kind and good
to our little daughter.’ Now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom;
but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat
out of, they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her.
So twelve fairies came, each with a high red cap on her head, and red
shoes with high heels on her feet, and a long white wand in her hand:
and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all
their best gifts to the little princess. One gave her goodness, another
beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all that was good in the
world.

Just as eleven of them had done blessing her, a great noise was heard in
the courtyard, and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was
come, with a black cap on her head, and black shoes on her feet, and a
broomstick in her hand: and presently up she came into the dining-hall.
Now, as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry, and
scolded the king and queen very much, and set to work to take her
revenge. So she cried out, ‘The king’s daughter shall, in her fifteenth
year, be wounded by a spindle, and fall down dead.’ Then the twelfth of
the friendly fairies, who had not yet given her gift, came forward, and
said that the evil wish must be fulfilled, but that she could soften its
mischief; so her gift was, that the king’s daughter, when the spindle
wounded her, should not really die, but should only fall asleep for a
hundred years.

However, the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from
the threatened evil; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom
should be bought up and burnt. But all the gifts of the first eleven
fairies were in the meantime fulfilled; for the princess was so
beautiful, and well behaved, and good, and wise, that everyone who knew
her loved her.

It happened that, on the very day she was fifteen years old, the king
and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she
roved about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till
at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase
ending with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when
she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily. ‘Why, how now, good mother,’ said the princess; ‘what
are you doing there?’ ‘Spinning,’ said the old lady, and nodded her
head, humming a tune, while buzz! went the wheel. ‘How prettily that
little thing turns round!’ said the princess, and took the spindle
and began to try and spin. But scarcely had she touched it, before the
fairy’s prophecy was fulfilled; the spindle wounded her, and she fell
down lifeless on the ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who had just come home, and all their court,
fell asleep too; and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the court, the pigeons on the house-top, and the very flies slept upon
the walls. Even the fire on the hearth left off blazing, and went to
sleep; the jack stopped, and the spit that was turning about with a
goose upon it for the king’s dinner stood still; and the cook, who was
at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box
on the ear for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell
asleep; the butler, who was slyly tasting the ale, fell asleep with the
jug at his lips: and thus everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker; till at last the old palace was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen. But
there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping Briar
Rose (for so the king’s daughter was called): so that, from time to
time, several kings’ sons came, and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace. This, however, none of them could ever do; for the
thorns and bushes laid hold of them, as it were with hands; and there
they stuck fast, and died wretchedly.

After many, many years there came a king’s son into that land: and an
old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns; and how a beautiful
palace stood behind it, and how a wonderful princess, called Briar Rose,
lay in it asleep, with all her court. He told, too, how he had heard
from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had tried to
break through the thicket, but that they had all stuck fast in it, and
died. Then the young prince said, ‘All this shall not frighten me; I
will go and see this Briar Rose.’ The old man tried to hinder him, but
he was bent upon going.

Now that very day the hundred years were ended; and as the prince came
to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs, through
which he went with ease, and they shut in after him as thick as ever.
Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the dogs
asleep; and the horses were standing in the stables; and on the roof sat
the pigeons fast asleep, with their heads under their wings. And when he
came into the palace, the flies were sleeping on the walls; the spit
was standing still; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips, going
to drink a draught; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be
plucked; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand, as
if she was going to beat the boy.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower, and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was; and there she lay,
fast asleep on a couch by the window. She looked so beautiful that he
could not take his eyes off her, so he stooped down and gave her a kiss.
But the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled
upon him; and they went out together; and soon the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and gazed on each other with great wonder.
And the horses shook themselves, and the dogs jumped up and barked; the
pigeons took their heads from under their wings, and looked about and
flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed again; the fire in
the kitchen blazed up; round went the jack, and round went the spit,
with the goose for the king’s dinner upon it; the butler finished his
draught of ale; the maid went on plucking the fowl; and the cook gave
the boy the box on his ear.

And then the prince and Briar Rose were married, and the wedding feast
was given; and they lived happily together all their lives long.




THE DOG AND THE SPARROW

A shepherd’s dog had a master who took no care of him, but often let him
suffer the greatest hunger. At last he could bear it no longer; so he
took to his heels, and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood.
On the road he met a sparrow that said to him, ‘Why are you so sad,
my friend?’ ‘Because,’ said the dog, ‘I am very very hungry, and have
nothing to eat.’ ‘If that be all,’ answered the sparrow, ‘come with me
into the next town, and I will soon find you plenty of food.’ So on they
went together into the town: and as they passed by a butcher’s shop,
the sparrow said to the dog, ‘Stand there a little while till I peck you
down a piece of meat.’ So the sparrow perched upon the shelf: and having
first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her, she
pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf,
till at last down it fell. Then the dog snapped it up, and scrambled
away with it into a corner, where he soon ate it all up. ‘Well,’ said
the sparrow, ‘you shall have some more if you will; so come with me to
the next shop, and I will peck you down another steak.’ When the dog had
eaten this too, the sparrow said to him, ‘Well, my good friend, have you
had enough now?’ ‘I have had plenty of meat,’ answered he, ‘but I should
like to have a piece of bread to eat after it.’ ‘Come with me then,’
said the sparrow, ‘and you shall soon have that too.’ So she took him
to a baker’s shop, and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window, till
they fell down: and as the dog still wished for more, she took him to
another shop and pecked down some more for him. When that was eaten, the
sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now. ‘Yes,’ said he; ‘and
now let us take a walk a little way out of the town.’ So they both went
out upon the high road; but as the weather was warm, they had not gone
far before the dog said, ‘I am very much tired--I should like to take a
nap.’ ‘Very well,’ answered the sparrow, ‘do so, and in the meantime
I will perch upon that bush.’ So the dog stretched himself out on the
road, and fell fast asleep. Whilst he slept, there came by a carter with
a cart drawn by three horses, and loaded with two casks of wine. The
sparrow, seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way, but would
go on in the track in which the dog lay, so as to drive over him, called
out, ‘Stop! stop! Mr Carter, or it shall be the worse for you.’ But the
carter, grumbling to himself, ‘You make it the worse for me, indeed!
what can you do?’ cracked his whip, and drove his cart over the poor
dog, so that the wheels crushed him to death. ‘There,’ cried the
sparrow, ‘thou cruel villain, thou hast killed my friend the dog. Now
mind what I say. This deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth.’
‘Do your worst, and welcome,’ said the brute, ‘what harm can you do me?’
and passed on. But the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart, and
pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it; and then
all the wine ran out, without the carter seeing it. At last he looked
round, and saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask quite empty.
‘What an unlucky wretch I am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow, as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses, and
pecked at him till he reared up and kicked. When the carter saw this,
he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow, meaning to kill
her; but she flew away, and the blow fell upon the poor horse’s head
with such force, that he fell down dead. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’
cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow. And as the carter
went on with the other two horses, she again crept under the tilt of the
cart, and pecked out the bung of the second cask, so that all the wine
ran out. When the carter saw this, he again cried out, ‘Miserable wretch
that I am!’ But the sparrow answered, ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ and
perched on the head of the second horse, and pecked at him too. The
carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet; but away she
flew, and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the
spot. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ said he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse, she began to peck him
too. The carter was mad with fury; and without looking about him, or
caring what he was about, struck again at the sparrow; but killed his
third horse as he done the other two. ‘Alas! miserable wretch that I
am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ answered the sparrow as she flew
away; ‘now will I plague and punish thee at thy own house.’ The
carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him, and to go home
overflowing with rage and vexation. ‘Alas!’ said he to his wife, ‘what
ill luck has befallen me!--my wine is all spilt, and my horses all three
dead.’ ‘Alas! husband,’ replied she, ‘and a wicked bird has come into
the house, and has brought with her all the birds in the world, I am
sure, and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft, and are eating it
up at such a rate!’ Away ran the husband upstairs, and saw thousands of
birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn, with the sparrow in the
midst of them. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ cried the carter; for he saw
that the corn was almost all gone. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the
sparrow; ‘thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life yet!’ and away she flew.

The carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had, went down
into his kitchen; and was still not sorry for what he had done, but sat
himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner. But the sparrow sat
on the outside of the window, and cried ‘Carter! thy cruelty shall cost
thee thy life!’ With that he jumped up in a rage, seized his hatchet,
and threw it at the sparrow; but it missed her, and only broke the
window. The sparrow now hopped in, perched upon the window-seat, and
cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life!’ Then he became mad and
blind with rage, and struck the window-seat with such force that he
cleft it in two: and as the sparrow flew from place to place, the carter
and his wife were so furious, that they broke all their furniture,
glasses, chairs, benches, the table, and at last the walls, without
touching the bird at all. In the end, however, they caught her: and the
wife said, ‘Shall I kill her at once?’ ‘No,’ cried he, ‘that is letting
her off too easily: she shall die a much more cruel death; I will eat
her.’ But the sparrow began to flutter about, and stretch out her neck
and cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life yet!’ With that he
could wait no longer: so he gave his wife the hatchet, and cried, ‘Wife,
strike at the bird and kill her in my hand.’ And the wife struck; but
she missed her aim, and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down
dead, and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest.




THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES

There was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters. They slept in
twelve beds all in one room; and when they went to bed, the doors were
shut and locked up; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite
worn through as if they had been danced in all night; and yet nobody
could find out how it happened, or where they had been.

Then the king made it known to all the land, that if any person could
discover the secret, and find out where it was that the princesses
danced in the night, he should have the one he liked best for his
wife, and should be king after his death; but whoever tried and did not
succeed, after three days and nights, should be put to death.

A king’s son soon came. He was well entertained, and in the evening was
taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their
twelve beds. There he was to sit and watch where they went to dance;
and, in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it, the door
of his chamber was left open. But the king’s son soon fell asleep; and
when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been
dancing, for the soles of their shoes were full of holes. The same thing
happened the second and third night: so the king ordered his head to be
cut off. After him came several others; but they had all the same luck,
and all lost their lives in the same manner.

Now it chanced that an old soldier, who had been wounded in battle
and could fight no longer, passed through the country where this king
reigned: and as he was travelling through a wood, he met an old woman,
who asked him where he was going. ‘I hardly know where I am going, or
what I had better do,’ said the soldier; ‘but I think I should like very
well to find out where it is that the princesses dance, and then in time
I might be a king.’ ‘Well,’ said the old dame, ‘that is no very hard
task: only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the
princesses will bring to you in the evening; and as soon as she leaves
you pretend to be fast asleep.’

Then she gave him a cloak, and said, ‘As soon as you put that on
you will become invisible, and you will then be able to follow the
princesses wherever they go.’ When the soldier heard all this good
counsel, he determined to try his luck: so he went to the king, and said
he was willing to undertake the task.

He was as well received as the others had been, and the king ordered
fine royal robes to be given him; and when the evening came he was led
to the outer chamber. Just as he was going to lie down, the eldest of
the princesses brought him a cup of wine; but the soldier threw it all
away secretly, taking care not to drink a drop. Then he laid himself
down on his bed, and in a little while began to snore very loud as if
he was fast asleep. When the twelve princesses heard this they laughed
heartily; and the eldest said, ‘This fellow too might have done a wiser
thing than lose his life in this way!’ Then they rose up and opened
their drawers and boxes, and took out all their fine clothes, and
dressed themselves at the glass, and skipped about as if they were eager
to begin dancing. But the youngest said, ‘I don’t know how it is, while
you are so happy I feel very uneasy; I am sure some mischance will
befall us.’ ‘You simpleton,’ said the eldest, ‘you are always afraid;
have you forgotten how many kings’ sons have already watched in vain?
And as for this soldier, even if I had not given him his sleeping
draught, he would have slept soundly enough.’

When they were all ready, they went and looked at the soldier; but he
snored on, and did not stir hand or foot: so they thought they were
quite safe; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands,
and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open. The soldier
saw them going down through the trap-door one after another, the eldest
leading the way; and thinking he had no time to lose, he jumped up, put
on the cloak which the old woman had given him, and followed them;
but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest
princess, and she cried out to her sisters, ‘All is not right; someone
took hold of my gown.’ ‘You silly creature!’ said the eldest, ‘it is
nothing but a nail in the wall.’ Then down they all went, and at the
bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees; and
the leaves were all of silver, and glittered and sparkled beautifully.
The soldier wished to take away some token of the place; so he broke
off a little branch, and there came a loud noise from the tree. Then the
youngest daughter said again, ‘I am sure all is not right--did not you
hear that noise? That never happened before.’ But the eldest said, ‘It
is only our princes, who are shouting for joy at our approach.’

Then they came to another grove of trees, where all the leaves were of
gold; and afterwards to a third, where the leaves were all glittering
diamonds. And the soldier broke a branch from each; and every time there
was a loud noise, which made the youngest sister tremble with fear; but
the eldest still said, it was only the princes, who were crying for joy.
So they went on till they came to a great lake; and at the side of the
lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them,
who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses.

One of the princesses went into each boat, and the soldier stepped into
the same boat with the youngest. As they were rowing over the lake, the
prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier
said, ‘I do not know why it is, but though I am rowing with all my might
we do not get on so fast as usual, and I am quite tired: the boat
seems very heavy today.’ ‘It is only the heat of the weather,’ said the
princess: ‘I feel it very warm too.’

On the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle, from
which came the merry music of horns and trumpets. There they all landed,
and went into the castle, and each prince danced with his princess; and
the soldier, who was all the time invisible, danced with them too; and
when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her, he drank it
all up, so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty. At this,
too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always
silenced her. They danced on till three o’clock in the morning, and then
all their shoes were worn out, so that they were obliged to leave off.
The princes rowed them back again over the lake (but this time the
soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess); and on the
opposite shore they took leave of each other, the princesses promising
to come again the next night.

When they came to the stairs, the soldier ran on before the princesses,
and laid himself down; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very
much tired, they heard him snoring in his bed; so they said, ‘Now all
is quite safe’; then they undressed themselves, put away their fine
clothes, pulled off their shoes, and went to bed. In the morning the
soldier said nothing about what had happened, but determined to see more
of this strange adventure, and went again the second and third night;
and every thing happened just as before; the princesses danced each time
till their shoes were worn to pieces, and then returned home. However,
on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a
token of where he had been.

As soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret, he was taken
before the king with the three branches and the golden cup; and the
twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would
say. And when the king asked him. ‘Where do my twelve daughters dance at
night?’ he answered, ‘With twelve princes in a castle under ground.’ And
then he told the king all that had happened, and showed him the three
branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him. Then the king
called for the princesses, and asked them whether what the soldier said
was true: and when they saw that they were discovered, and that it was
of no use to deny what had happened, they confessed it all. And the king
asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife; and he
answered, ‘I am not very young, so I will have the eldest.’--And they
were married that very day, and the soldier was chosen to be the king’s
heir.




THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty, close
by the seaside. The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and
one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the sparkling
waves and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away
deep into the water: and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish.
But the fish said, ‘Pray let me live! I am not a real fish; I am an
enchanted prince: put me in the water again, and let me go!’ ‘Oh, ho!’
said the man, ‘you need not make so many words about the matter; I will
have nothing to do with a fish that can talk: so swim away, sir, as soon
as you please!’ Then he put him back into the water, and the fish darted
straight down to the bottom, and left a long streak of blood behind him
on the wave.

When the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he told her how
he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted
prince, and how, on hearing it speak, he had let it go again. ‘Did not
you ask it for anything?’ said the wife, ‘we live very wretchedly here,
in this nasty dirty pigsty; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug
little cottage.’

The fisherman did not much like the business: however, he went to the
seashore; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and
green. And he stood at the water’s edge, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, ‘Well, what is her will?
What does your wife want?’ ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘she says that when
I had caught you, I ought to have asked you for something before I let
you go; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty, and wants
a snug little cottage.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is in the
cottage already!’ So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the
door of a nice trim little cottage. ‘Come in, come in!’ said she; ‘is
not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had?’ And there was a
parlour, and a bedchamber, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage there
was a little garden, planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits; and
there was a courtyard behind, full of ducks and chickens. ‘Ah!’ said the
fisherman, ‘how happily we shall live now!’ ‘We will try to do so, at
least,’ said his wife.

Everything went right for a week or two, and then Dame Ilsabill said,
‘Husband, there is not near room enough for us in this cottage; the
courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small; I should like to
have a large stone castle to live in: go to the fish again and tell him
to give us a castle.’ ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘I don’t like to go to
him again, for perhaps he will be angry; we ought to be easy with this
pretty cottage to live in.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said the wife; ‘he will do it
very willingly, I know; go along and try!’

The fisherman went, but his heart was very heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it looked blue and gloomy, though it was very calm; and he went
close to the edge of the waves, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the man,
dolefully, ‘my wife wants to live in a stone castle.’ ‘Go home, then,’
said the fish; ‘she is standing at the gate of it already.’ So away went
the fisherman, and found his wife standing before the gate of a great
castle. ‘See,’ said she, ‘is not this grand?’ With that they went into
the castle together, and found a great many servants there, and the
rooms all richly furnished, and full of golden chairs and tables; and
behind the castle was a garden, and around it was a park half a
mile long, full of sheep, and goats, and hares, and deer; and in the
courtyard were stables and cow-houses. ‘Well,’ said the man, ‘now we
will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of
our lives.’ ‘Perhaps we may,’ said the wife; ‘but let us sleep upon it,
before we make up our minds to that.’ So they went to bed.

The next morning when Dame Ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight, and
she jogged the fisherman with her elbow, and said, ‘Get up, husband,
and bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land.’ ‘Wife, wife,’
said the man, ‘why should we wish to be the king? I will not be king.’
‘Then I will,’ said she. ‘But, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘how can you
be king--the fish cannot make you a king?’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘say
no more about it, but go and try! I will be king.’ So the man went away
quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king. This time
the sea looked a dark grey colour, and was overspread with curling waves
and the ridges of foam as he cried out:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Alas!’ said the poor
man, ‘my wife wants to be king.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is king
already.’

Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace he saw
a troop of soldiers, and heard the sound of drums and trumpets. And when
he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds,
with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her stood six
fair maidens, each a head taller than the other. ‘Well, wife,’ said the
fisherman, ‘are you king?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am king.’ And when he had
looked at her for a long time, he said, ‘Ah, wife! what a fine thing it
is to be king! Now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long
as we live.’ ‘I don’t know how that may be,’ said she; ‘never is a long
time. I am king, it is true; but I begin to be tired of that, and I
think I should like to be emperor.’ ‘Alas, wife! why should you wish to
be emperor?’ said the fisherman. ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘go to the fish!
I say I will be emperor.’ ‘Ah, wife!’ replied the fisherman, ‘the fish
cannot make an emperor, I am sure, and I should not like to ask him for
such a thing.’ ‘I am king,’ said Ilsabill, ‘and you are my slave; so go
at once!’

So the fisherman was forced to go; and he muttered as he went along,
‘This will come to no good, it is too much to ask; the fish will be
tired at last, and then we shall be sorry for what we have done.’ He
soon came to the seashore; and the water was quite black and muddy, and
a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about, but he
went as near as he could to the water’s brink, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman,
‘she wants to be emperor.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is emperor
already.’

So he went home again; and as he came near he saw his wife Ilsabill
sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold, with a great crown on
her head full two yards high; and on each side of her stood her guards
and attendants in a row, each one smaller than the other, from the
tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger. And
before her stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went
up to her and said, ‘Wife, are you emperor?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am
emperor.’ ‘Ah!’ said the man, as he gazed upon her, ‘what a fine thing
it is to be emperor!’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘why should we stop at being
emperor? I will be pope next.’ ‘O wife, wife!’ said he, ‘how can you be
pope? there is but one pope at a time in Christendom.’ ‘Husband,’ said
she, ‘I will be pope this very day.’ ‘But,’ replied the husband, ‘the
fish cannot make you pope.’ ‘What nonsense!’ said she; ‘if he can make
an emperor, he can make a pope: go and try him.’

So the fisherman went. But when he came to the shore the wind was raging
and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves, and the ships were
in trouble, and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows. In the
middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky, but towards
the south all was red, as if a dreadful storm was rising. At this sight
the fisherman was dreadfully frightened, and he trembled so that his
knees knocked together: but still he went down near to the shore, and
said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘my
wife wants to be pope.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is pope already.’

Then the fisherman went home, and found Ilsabill sitting on a throne
that was two miles high. And she had three great crowns on her head, and
around her stood all the pomp and power of the Church. And on each side
of her were two rows of burning lights, of all sizes, the greatest as
large as the highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no
larger than a small rushlight. ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, as he looked
at all this greatness, ‘are you pope?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am pope.’
‘Well, wife,’ replied he, ‘it is a grand thing to be pope; and now
you must be easy, for you can be nothing greater.’ ‘I will think about
that,’ said the wife. Then they went to bed: but Dame Ilsabill could not
sleep all night for thinking what she should be next. At last, as she
was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose. ‘Ha!’ thought she,
as she woke up and looked at it through the window, ‘after all I cannot
prevent the sun rising.’ At this thought she was very angry, and wakened
her husband, and said, ‘Husband, go to the fish and tell him I must
be lord of the sun and moon.’ The fisherman was half asleep, but the
thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed.
‘Alas, wife!’ said he, ‘cannot you be easy with being pope?’ ‘No,’
said she, ‘I am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my
leave. Go to the fish at once!’

Then the man went shivering with fear; and as he was going down to
the shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the very rocks
shook. And all the heavens became black with stormy clouds, and the
lightnings played, and the thunders rolled; and you might have seen in
the sea great black waves, swelling up like mountains with crowns of
white foam upon their heads. And the fisherman crept towards the sea,
and cried out, as well as he could:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘she wants to
be lord of the sun and moon.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish, ‘to your pigsty
again.’

And there they live to this very day.




THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR

Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said: ‘Brother
wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?’ ‘That is the King of birds,’
said the wolf, ‘before whom we must bow down.’ In reality the bird was
the willow-wren. ‘IF that’s the case,’ said the bear, ‘I should very
much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.’ ‘That is not
done quite as you seem to think,’ said the wolf; ‘you must wait until
the Queen comes,’ Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with some food in
her beak, and the lord King came too, and they began to feed their young
ones. The bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him
back by the sleeve, and said: ‘No, you must wait until the lord and lady
Queen have gone away again.’ So they took stock of the hole where the
nest lay, and trotted away. The bear, however, could not rest until he
had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, went to it
again. The King and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw
five or six young ones lying there. ‘Is that the royal palace?’ cried
the bear; ‘it is a wretched palace, and you are not King’s children, you
are disreputable children!’ When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed: ‘No, that we are not! Our parents are
honest people! Bear, you will have to pay for that!’

The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into their
holes. The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and scream, and
when their parents again brought food they said: ‘We will not so much as
touch one fly’s leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have
settled whether we are respectable children or not; the bear has been
here and has insulted us!’ Then the old King said: ‘Be easy, he shall
be punished,’ and he at once flew with the Queen to the bear’s cave, and
called in: ‘Old Growler, why have you insulted my children? You shall
suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war.’ Thus war was
announced to the Bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take
part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth
contained. And the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the
air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and
flies had to come.

When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies
to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief. The gnat, who was
the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled,
and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be
announced. There stood the bear, and he called the fox before him
and said: ‘Fox, you are the most cunning of all animals, you shall be
general and lead us.’ ‘Good,’ said the fox, ‘but what signal shall we
agree upon?’ No one knew that, so the fox said: ‘I have a fine long
bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. When I lift
my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if I
let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.’ When the gnat had heard
that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, down to the minutest
detail, to the willow-wren. When day broke, and the battle was to begin,
all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the
earth trembled. The willow-wren with his army also came flying through
the air with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one
was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each
other. But the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle
beneath the fox’s tail, and sting with all his might. When the fox felt
the first string, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but
he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second
sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could
hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his legs. When
the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to flee, each
into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.

Then the King and Queen flew home to their children and cried:
‘Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart’s content, we have won
the battle!’ But the young wrens said: ‘We will not eat yet, the bear
must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable
children, before we will do that.’ Then the willow-wren flew to the
bear’s hole and cried: ‘Growler, you are to come to the nest to my
children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of your body shall
be broken.’ So the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged
their pardon. And now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat
down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the
night.




THE FROG-PRINCE

One fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs, and went
out to take a walk by herself in a wood; and when she came to a cool
spring of water, that rose in the midst of it, she sat herself down
to rest a while. Now she had a golden ball in her hand, which was her
favourite plaything; and she was always tossing it up into the air, and
catching it again as it fell. After a time she threw it up so high that
she missed catching it as it fell; and the ball bounded away, and rolled
along upon the ground, till at last it fell down into the spring. The
princess looked into the spring after her ball, but it was very deep, so
deep that she could not see the bottom of it. Then she began to bewail
her loss, and said, ‘Alas! if I could only get my ball again, I would
give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the
world.’

Whilst she was speaking, a frog put its head out of the water, and said,
‘Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘what can you
do for me, you nasty frog? My golden ball has fallen into the spring.’
The frog said, ‘I want not your pearls, and jewels, and fine clothes;
but if you will love me, and let me live with you and eat from off
your golden plate, and sleep upon your bed, I will bring you your ball
again.’ ‘What nonsense,’ thought the princess, ‘this silly frog is
talking! He can never even get out of the spring to visit me, though
he may be able to get my ball for me, and therefore I will tell him he
shall have what he asks.’ So she said to the frog, ‘Well, if you will
bring me my ball, I will do all you ask.’ Then the frog put his head
down, and dived deep under the water; and after a little while he came
up again, with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the edge of the
spring. As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick
it up; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she
never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could.
The frog called after her, ‘Stay, princess, and take me with you as you
said,’ But she did not stop to hear a word.

The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a
strange noise--tap, tap--plash, plash--as if something was coming up the
marble staircase: and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the
door, and a little voice cried out and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw
the frog, whom she had quite forgotten. At this sight she was sadly
frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her
seat. The king, her father, seeing that something had frightened her,
asked her what was the matter. ‘There is a nasty frog,’ said she, ‘at
the door, that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning: I
told him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never
get out of the spring; but there he is at the door, and he wants to come
in.’

While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the king said to the young princess, ‘As you have given your word
you must keep it; so go and let him in.’ She did so, and the frog hopped
into the room, and then straight on--tap, tap--plash, plash--from the
bottom of the room to the top, till he came up close to the table where
the princess sat. ‘Pray lift me upon chair,’ said he to the princess,
‘and let me sit next to you.’ As soon as she had done this, the frog
said, ‘Put your plate nearer to me, that I may eat out of it.’ This
she did, and when he had eaten as much as he could, he said, ‘Now I am
tired; carry me upstairs, and put me into your bed.’ And the princess,
though very unwilling, took him up in her hand, and put him upon the
pillow of her own bed, where he slept all night long. As soon as it was
light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house.
‘Now, then,’ thought the princess, ‘at last he is gone, and I shall be
troubled with him no more.’

But she was mistaken; for when night came again she heard the same
tapping at the door; and the frog came once more, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

And when the princess opened the door the frog came in, and slept upon
her pillow as before, till the morning broke. And the third night he did
the same. But when the princess awoke on the following morning she was
astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince, gazing on her
with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen, and standing at the head
of her bed.

He told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy, who had
changed him into a frog; and that he had been fated so to abide till
some princess should take him out of the spring, and let him eat from
her plate, and sleep upon her bed for three nights. ‘You,’ said the
prince, ‘have broken his cruel charm, and now I have nothing to wish for
but that you should go with me into my father’s kingdom, where I will
marry you, and love you as long as you live.’

The young princess, you may be sure, was not long in saying ‘Yes’ to
all this; and as they spoke a gay coach drove up, with eight beautiful
horses, decked with plumes of feathers and a golden harness; and behind
the coach rode the prince’s servant, faithful Heinrich, who had bewailed
the misfortunes of his dear master during his enchantment so long and so
bitterly, that his heart had well-nigh burst.

They then took leave of the king, and got into the coach with eight
horses, and all set out, full of joy and merriment, for the prince’s
kingdom, which they reached safely; and there they lived happily a great
many years.




CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much
to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at
length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together.
‘But we must make a provision for winter, or else we shall suffer
from hunger,’ said the cat; ‘and you, little mouse, cannot venture
everywhere, or you will be caught in a trap some day.’ The good advice
was followed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where
to put it. At length, after much consideration, the cat said: ‘I know no
place where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one
dares take anything away from there. We will set it beneath the altar,
and not touch it until we are really in need of it.’ So the pot was
placed in safety, but it was not long before the cat had a great
yearning for it, and said to the mouse: ‘I want to tell you something,
little mouse; my cousin has brought a little son into the world, and has
asked me to be godmother; he is white with brown spots, and I am to hold
him over the font at the christening. Let me go out today, and you look
after the house by yourself.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘by all
means go, and if you get anything very good to eat, think of me. I
should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.’ All this,
however, was untrue; the cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, stole to the pot of fat,
began to lick at it, and licked the top of the fat off. Then she took a
walk upon the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then
stretched herself in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought
of the pot of fat, and not until it was evening did she return home.
‘Well, here you are again,’ said the mouse, ‘no doubt you have had a
merry day.’ ‘All went off well,’ answered the cat. ‘What name did they
give the child?’ ‘Top off!’ said the cat quite coolly. ‘Top off!’ cried
the mouse, ‘that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in
your family?’ ‘What does that matter,’ said the cat, ‘it is no worse
than Crumb-stealer, as your godchildren are called.’

Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning. She said to
the mouse: ‘You must do me a favour, and once more manage the house for
a day alone. I am again asked to be godmother, and, as the child has a
white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’ The good mouse consented,
but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church, and devoured
half the pot of fat. ‘Nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to
oneself,’ said she, and was quite satisfied with her day’s work. When
she went home the mouse inquired: ‘And what was the child christened?’
‘Half-done,’ answered the cat. ‘Half-done! What are you saying? I
never heard the name in my life, I’ll wager anything it is not in the
calendar!’

The cat’s mouth soon began to water for some more licking. ‘All good
things go in threes,’ said she, ‘I am asked to stand godmother again.
The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with that
exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body; this only
happens once every few years, you will let me go, won’t you?’ ‘Top-off!
Half-done!’ answered the mouse, ‘they are such odd names, they make me
very thoughtful.’ ‘You sit at home,’ said the cat, ‘in your dark-grey
fur coat and long tail, and are filled with fancies, that’s because
you do not go out in the daytime.’ During the cat’s absence the mouse
cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat entirely
emptied the pot of fat. ‘When everything is eaten up one has some
peace,’ said she to herself, and well filled and fat she did not return
home till night. The mouse at once asked what name had been given to
the third child. ‘It will not please you more than the others,’ said the
cat. ‘He is called All-gone.’ ‘All-gone,’ cried the mouse ‘that is the
most suspicious name of all! I have never seen it in print. All-gone;
what can that mean?’ and she shook her head, curled herself up, and lay
down to sleep.

From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, but
when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found
outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said: ‘Come, cat,
we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we
shall enjoy that.’ ‘Yes,’ answered the cat, ‘you will enjoy it as much
as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the
window.’ They set out on their way, but when they arrived, the pot of
fat certainly was still in its place, but it was empty. ‘Alas!’ said the
mouse, ‘now I see what has happened, now it comes to light! You are a true
friend! You have devoured all when you were standing godmother. First
top off, then half-done, then--’ ‘Will you hold your tongue,’ cried the
cat, ‘one word more, and I will eat you too.’ ‘All-gone’ was already on
the poor mouse’s lips; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang
on her, seized her, and swallowed her down. Verily, that is the way of
the world.




THE GOOSE-GIRL

The king of a great land died, and left his queen to take care of their
only child. This child was a daughter, who was very beautiful; and her
mother loved her dearly, and was very kind to her. And there was a good
fairy too, who was fond of the princess, and helped her mother to watch
over her. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a
great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she
got ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen her
mother, packed up a great many costly things; jewels, and gold, and
silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and in short everything that became a
royal bride. And she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give
her into the bridegroom’s hands; and each had a horse for the journey.
Now the princess’s horse was the fairy’s gift, and it was called Falada,
and could speak.

When the time came for them to set out, the fairy went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to the princess, and said, ‘Take care of it, dear child; for
it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road.’ Then they all took
a sorrowful leave of the princess; and she put the lock of hair into
her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on her journey to her
bridegroom’s kingdom.

One day, as they were riding along by a brook, the princess began to
feel very thirsty: and she said to her maid, ‘Pray get down, and fetch
me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook, for I want to
drink.’ ‘Nay,’ said the maid, ‘if you are thirsty, get off yourself, and
stoop down by the water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid any
longer.’ Then she was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt over the
little brook, and drank; for she was frightened, and dared not bring out
her golden cup; and she wept and said, ‘Alas! what will become of me?’
And the lock answered her, and said:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

But the princess was very gentle and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid’s ill behaviour, but got upon her horse again.

Then all rode farther on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid’s rude
speech, and said, ‘Pray get down, and fetch me some water to drink in
my golden cup.’ But the maid answered her, and even spoke more haughtily
than before: ‘Drink if you will, but I shall not be your waiting-maid.’
Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse, and lay
down, and held her head over the running stream, and cried and said,
‘What will become of me?’ And the lock of hair answered her again:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom,
and floated away with the water. Now she was so frightened that she did
not see it; but her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power, now that
she had lost the hair. So when the bride had done drinking, and would
have got upon Falada again, the maid said, ‘I shall ride upon Falada,
and you may have my horse instead’; so she was forced to give up her
horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her
maid’s shabby ones.

At last, as they drew near the end of their journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had
happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well.

Then the waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride rode upon the
other horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came to the
royal court. There was great joy at their coming, and the prince flew to
meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one
who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber;
but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.

Now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do; so he
amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window, looking at what was
going on; and he saw her in the courtyard. As she looked very pretty,
and too delicate for a waiting-maid, he went up into the royal chamber
to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her, that was thus left
standing in the court below. ‘I brought her with me for the sake of her
company on the road,’ said she; ‘pray give the girl some work to do,
that she may not be idle.’ The old king could not for some time think
of any work for her to do; but at last he said, ‘I have a lad who takes
care of my geese; she may go and help him.’ Now the name of this lad,
that the real bride was to help in watching the king’s geese, was
Curdken.

But the false bride said to the prince, ‘Dear husband, pray do me one
piece of kindness.’ ‘That I will,’ said the prince. ‘Then tell one of
your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon, for it
was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road’; but the truth was,
she was very much afraid lest Falada should some day or other speak, and
tell all she had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the
faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it, she
wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada’s head against a large
dark gate of the city, through which she had to pass every morning
and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes. Then the
slaughterer said he would do as she wished; and cut off the head, and
nailed it up under the dark gate.

Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate,
she said sorrowfully:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then they went out of the city, and drove the geese on. And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank there, and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure silver; and when Curdken
saw it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of the
locks out, but she cried:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken’s hat; and
away it flew over the hills: and he was forced to turn and run after
it; till, by the time he came back, she had done combing and curling her
hair, and had put it up again safe. Then he was very angry and sulky,
and would not speak to her at all; but they watched the geese until it
grew dark in the evening, and then drove them homewards.

The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada’s head, and cried:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then she drove on the geese, and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out her hair as before; and Curdken ran up to her, and wanted to
take hold of it; but she cried out quickly:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then the wind came and blew away his hat; and off it flew a great way,
over the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it; and when
he came back she had bound up her hair again, and all was safe. So they
watched the geese till it grew dark.

In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king, and
said, ‘I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any
longer.’ ‘Why?’ said the king. ‘Because, instead of doing any good, she
does nothing but tease me all day long.’ Then the king made him tell him
what had happened. And Curdken said, ‘When we go in the morning through
the dark gate with our flock of geese, she cries and talks with the head
of a horse that hangs upon the wall, and says:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answers:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; how his hat was blown away; and how he was forced
to run after it, and to leave his flock of geese to themselves. But the
old king told the boy to go out again the next day: and when morning
came, he placed himself behind the dark gate, and heard how she spoke
to Falada, and how Falada answered. Then he went into the field, and
hid himself in a bush by the meadow’s side; and he soon saw with his own
eyes how they drove the flock of geese; and how, after a little time,
she let down her hair that glittered in the sun. And then he heard her
say:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken’s hat, and away
went Curdken after it, while the girl went on combing and curling her
hair. All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside,
and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and said, ‘That
I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life.’

But the old king begged so hard, that she had no peace till she had told
him all the tale, from beginning to end, word for word. And it was very
lucky for her that she did so, for when she had done the king ordered
royal clothes to be put upon her, and gazed on her with wonder, she was
so beautiful. Then he called his son and told him that he had only a
false bride; for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true
bride stood by. And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and
heard how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to
the false bride, the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all
his court. The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one
side, and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her again, for her
beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes; and she did not seem at all
like the little goose-girl, now that she had her brilliant dress on.

When they had eaten and drank, and were very merry, the old king said
he would tell them a tale. So he began, and told all the story of the
princess, as if it was one that he had once heard; and he asked the
true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus. ‘Nothing better,’ said this false bride, ‘than that she
should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails, and that
two white horses should be put to it, and should drag it from street to
street till she was dead.’ ‘Thou art she!’ said the old king; ‘and as
thou has judged thyself, so shall it be done to thee.’ And the young
king was then married to his true wife, and they reigned over the
kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives; and the good fairy came
to see them, and restored the faithful Falada to life again.




THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET


1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS

‘The nuts are quite ripe now,’ said Chanticleer to his wife Partlet,
‘suppose we go together to the mountains, and eat as many as we can,
before the squirrel takes them all away.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
Partlet, ‘let us go and make a holiday of it together.’

So they went to the mountains; and as it was a lovely day, they stayed
there till the evening. Now, whether it was that they had eaten so many
nuts that they could not walk, or whether they were lazy and would not,
I do not know: however, they took it into their heads that it did not
become them to go home on foot. So Chanticleer began to build a little
carriage of nutshells: and when it was finished, Partlet jumped into
it and sat down, and bid Chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her
home. ‘That’s a good joke!’ said Chanticleer; ‘no, that will never do;
I had rather by half walk home; I’ll sit on the box and be coachman,
if you like, but I’ll not draw.’ While this was passing, a duck came
quacking up and cried out, ‘You thieving vagabonds, what business have
you in my grounds? I’ll give it you well for your insolence!’ and upon
that she fell upon Chanticleer most lustily. But Chanticleer was no
coward, and returned the duck’s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely
that she soon began to cry out for mercy; which was only granted her
upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them. This she
agreed to do; and Chanticleer got upon the box, and drove, crying, ‘Now,
duck, get on as fast as you can.’ And away they went at a pretty good
pace.

After they had travelled along a little way, they met a needle and a pin
walking together along the road: and the needle cried out, ‘Stop, stop!’
and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way, and such
dirty walking they could not get on at all: he told them that he and his
friend, the pin, had been at a public-house a few miles off, and had sat
drinking till they had forgotten how late it was; he begged therefore
that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their
carriage. Chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows, and not
likely to take up much room, told them they might ride, but made them
promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in, nor to
tread on Partlet’s toes.

Late at night they arrived at an inn; and as it was bad travelling in
the dark, and the duck seemed much tired, and waddled about a good
deal from one side to the other, they made up their minds to fix their
quarters there: but the landlord at first was unwilling, and said his
house was full, thinking they might not be very respectable company:
however, they spoke civilly to him, and gave him the egg which Partlet
had laid by the way, and said they would give him the duck, who was in
the habit of laying one every day: so at last he let them come in, and
they bespoke a handsome supper, and spent the evening very jollily.

Early in the morning, before it was quite light, and when nobody was
stirring in the inn, Chanticleer awakened his wife, and, fetching the
egg, they pecked a hole in it, ate it up, and threw the shells into the
fireplace: they then went to the pin and needle, who were fast asleep,
and seizing them by the heads, stuck one into the landlord’s easy chair
and the other into his handkerchief; and, having done this, they crept
away as softly as possible. However, the duck, who slept in the open
air in the yard, heard them coming, and jumping into the brook which ran
close by the inn, soon swam out of their reach.

An hour or two afterwards the landlord got up, and took his handkerchief
to wipe his face, but the pin ran into him and pricked him: then he
walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire, but when he
stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes, and almost blinded him.
‘Bless me!’ said he, ‘all the world seems to have a design against my
head this morning’: and so saying, he threw himself sulkily into his
easy chair; but, oh dear! the needle ran into him; and this time the
pain was not in his head. He now flew into a very great passion, and,
suspecting the company who had come in the night before, he went to look
after them, but they were all off; so he swore that he never again
would take in such a troop of vagabonds, who ate a great deal, paid no
reckoning, and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks.


2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES

Another day, Chanticleer and Partlet wished to ride out together;
so Chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels, and
harnessed six mice to it; and then he and Partlet got into the carriage,
and away they drove. Soon afterwards a cat met them, and said, ‘Where
are you going?’ And Chanticleer replied,

 ‘All on our way
  A visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Then the cat said, ‘Take me with you,’ Chanticleer said, ‘With all my
heart: get up behind, and be sure you do not fall off.’

 ‘Take care of this handsome coach of mine,
  Nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine!
  Now, mice, be ready,
  And, wheels, run steady!
  For we are going a visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Soon after came up a millstone, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and
Chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with
them.

When they arrived at Mr Korbes’s house, he was not at home; so the mice
drew the carriage into the coach-house, Chanticleer and Partlet flew
upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fireplace, the duck got into
the washing cistern, the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow, the
millstone laid himself over the house door, and the egg rolled himself
up in the towel.

When Mr Korbes came home, he went to the fireplace to make a fire; but
the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes: so he ran to the kitchen to
wash himself; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face; and
when he tried to wipe himself, the egg broke to pieces in the towel all
over his face and eyes. Then he was very angry, and went without his
supper to bed; but when he laid his head on the pillow, the pin ran into
his cheek: at this he became quite furious, and, jumping up, would have
run out of the house; but when he came to the door, the millstone fell
down on his head, and killed him on the spot.


3. HOW PARTLET DIED AND WAS BURIED, AND HOW CHANTICLEER DIED OF GRIEF

Another day Chanticleer and Partlet agreed to go again to the mountains
to eat nuts; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found
should be shared equally between them. Now Partlet found a very large
nut; but she said nothing about it to Chanticleer, and kept it all to
herself: however, it was so big that she could not swallow it, and it
stuck in her throat. Then she was in a great fright, and cried out to
Chanticleer, ‘Pray run as fast as you can, and fetch me some water, or I
shall be choked.’ Chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river, and
said, ‘River, give me some water, for Partlet lies in the mountain, and
will be choked by a great nut.’ The river said, ‘Run first to the bride,
and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water.’ Chanticleer ran to
the bride, and said, ‘Bride, you must give me a silken cord, for then
the river will give me water, and the water I will carry to Partlet, who
lies on the mountain, and will be choked by a great nut.’ But the bride
said, ‘Run first, and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow
in the garden.’ Then Chanticleer ran to the garden, and took the garland
from the bough where it hung, and brought it to the bride; and then
the bride gave him the silken cord, and he took the silken cord to
the river, and the river gave him water, and he carried the water to
Partlet; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut, and lay
quite dead, and never moved any more.

Then Chanticleer was very sorry, and cried bitterly; and all the beasts
came and wept with him over poor Partlet. And six mice built a little
hearse to carry her to her grave; and when it was ready they harnessed
themselves before it, and Chanticleer drove them. On the way they
met the fox. ‘Where are you going, Chanticleer?’ said he. ‘To bury my
Partlet,’ said the other. ‘May I go with you?’ said the fox. ‘Yes; but
you must get up behind, or my horses will not be able to draw you.’ Then
the fox got up behind; and presently the wolf, the bear, the goat, and
all the beasts of the wood, came and climbed upon the hearse.

So on they went till they came to a rapid stream. ‘How shall we get
over?’ said Chanticleer. Then said a straw, ‘I will lay myself across,
and you may pass over upon me.’ But as the mice were going over, the
straw slipped away and fell into the water, and the six mice all fell in
and were drowned. What was to be done? Then a large log of wood came
and said, ‘I am big enough; I will lay myself across the stream, and you
shall pass over upon me.’ So he laid himself down; but they managed
so clumsily, that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the
stream. Then a stone, who saw what had happened, came up and kindly
offered to help poor Chanticleer by laying himself across the stream;
and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse, and
managed to get Partlet out of it; but the fox and the other mourners,
who were sitting behind, were too heavy, and fell back into the water
and were all carried away by the stream and drowned.

Thus Chanticleer was left alone with his dead Partlet; and having dug
a grave for her, he laid her in it, and made a little hillock over her.
Then he sat down by the grave, and wept and mourned, till at last he
died too; and so all were dead.




RAPUNZEL

There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length the woman hoped that God was about to grant her desire.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was
standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a
bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it
looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, she quite pined away,
and began to look pale and miserable. Then her husband was alarmed, and
asked: ‘What ails you, dear wife?’ ‘Ah,’ she replied, ‘if I can’t eat
some of the rampion, which is in the garden behind our house, I shall
die.’ The man, who loved her, thought: ‘Sooner than let your wife die,
bring her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.’
At twilight, he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the
enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily. It
tasted so good to her--so very good, that the next day she longed for it
three times as much as before. If he was to have any rest, her husband
must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom of evening
therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had clambered down the
wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before
him. ‘How can you dare,’ said she with angry look, ‘descend into my
garden and steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!’
‘Ah,’ answered he, ‘let mercy take the place of justice, I only made
up my mind to do it out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the
window, and felt such a longing for it that she would have died if she
had not got some to eat.’ Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be
softened, and said to him: ‘If the case be as you say, I will allow
you to take away with you as much rampion as you will, only I make one
condition, you must give me the child which your wife will bring into
the world; it shall be well treated, and I will care for it like a
mother.’ The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the
woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once, gave the
child the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was
twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a
little window. When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath it and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses,
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair
fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the king’s son rode through
the forest and passed by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her
solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound. The king’s
son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of the tower,
but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply
touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and
listened to it. Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw
that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress
climbed up to her. ‘If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I too
will try my fortune,’ said he, and the next day when it began to grow
dark, he went to the tower and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Immediately the hair fell down and the king’s son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her; but the king’s son began to talk to
her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred
that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought: ‘He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does’; and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his. She said: ‘I will willingly go away with
you, but I do not know how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk
every time that you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when
that is ready I will descend, and you will take me on your horse.’ They
agreed that until that time he should come to her every evening, for the
old woman came by day. The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until
once Rapunzel said to her: ‘Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that
you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king’s son--he
is with me in a moment.’ ‘Ah! you wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
‘What do I hear you say! I thought I had separated you from all
the world, and yet you have deceived me!’ In her anger she clutched
Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand,
seized a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut
off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless
that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great
grief and misery.

On the same day that she cast out Rapunzel, however, the enchantress
fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to the hook of the
window, and when the king’s son came and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

she let the hair down. The king’s son ascended, but instead of finding
his dearest Rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed at him with
wicked and venomous looks. ‘Aha!’ she cried mockingly, ‘you would fetch
your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest;
the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is
lost to you; you will never see her again.’ The king’s son was beside
himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower. He
escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his
eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but
roots and berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of
his dearest wife. Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at
length came to the desert where Rapunzel, with the twins to which she
had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness. He heard a
voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it, and
when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept. Two
of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could
see with them as before. He led her to his kingdom where he was
joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and
contented.




FUNDEVOGEL

There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt, and as
he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were
there. He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree, and at
the top of this a little child was sitting, for the mother had fallen
asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in
her arms, had flown down, snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.

The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to himself:
‘You will take him home with you, and bring him up with your Lina.’ He
took it home, therefore, and the two children grew up together. And the
one, which he had found on a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird
had carried it away. Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that
when they did not see each other they were sad.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and
began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out
to the spring. Lina saw this and said, ‘Listen, old Sanna, why are you
fetching so much water?’ ‘If you will never repeat it to anyone, I will
tell you why.’ So Lina said, no, she would never repeat it to anyone,
and then the cook said: ‘Early tomorrow morning, when the forester
is out hunting, I will heat the water, and when it is boiling in the
kettle, I will throw in Fundevogel, and will boil him in it.’

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and when he
was gone the children were still in bed. Then Lina said to Fundevogel:
‘If you will never leave me, I too will never leave you.’ Fundevogel
said: ‘Neither now, nor ever will I leave you.’ Then said Lina: ‘Then
will I tell you. Last night, old Sanna carried so many buckets of water
into the house that I asked her why she was doing that, and she said
that if I would promise not to tell anyone, and she said that early
tomorrow morning when father was out hunting, she would set the kettle
full of water, throw you into it and boil you; but we will get up
quickly, dress ourselves, and go away together.’

The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, and went
away. When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the
bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him into it. But when she came in,
and went to the beds, both the children were gone. Then she was terribly
alarmed, and she said to herself: ‘What shall I say now when the
forester comes home and sees that the children are gone? They must be
followed instantly to get them back again.’

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children. The children, however, were sitting outside the
forest, and when they saw from afar the three servants running, Lina
said to Fundevogel: ‘Never leave me, and I will never leave you.’
Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’ Then said Lina: ‘Do you become
a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.’ When the three servants came to
the forest, nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it, but
the children were nowhere. Then said they: ‘There is nothing to be done
here,’ and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing
in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it. Then the
old cook scolded and said: ‘You simpletons, you should have cut the
rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it home with
you; go, and do it at once.’ They had therefore to go out and look for
the second time. The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
Then Lina said: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now; nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Then do you
become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in it.’ So when the three
servants came, nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in
it. They said therefore to each other: ‘What can we do here, let us go
home.’ When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them;
so they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and there was a
chandelier in it. And the cook scolded them and said: ‘You fools! why
did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home
with you?’ And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went with
the three servants in pursuit of the children. The children, however,
saw from afar that the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling
after them. Then said Lina: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will
never leave you.’ Then said Fundevogel: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’
Said Lina: ‘Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.’ The cook,
however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay down by it,
and was about to drink it up. But the duck swam quickly to her, seized
her head in its beak and drew her into the water, and there the old
witch had to drown. Then the children went home together, and were
heartily delighted, and if they have not died, they are living still.




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

One summer’s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the
window; he was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. Then came
a peasant woman down the street crying: ‘Good jams, cheap! Good jams,
cheap!’ This rang pleasantly in the tailor’s ears; he stretched his
delicate head out of the window, and called: ‘Come up here, dear woman;
here you will get rid of your goods.’ The woman came up the three steps
to the tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots
for him. He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it, and
at length said: ‘The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out four
ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no
consequence.’ The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him
what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling. ‘Now, this jam
shall be blessed by God,’ cried the little tailor, ‘and give me health
and strength’; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself
a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it. ‘This won’t
taste bitter,’ said he, ‘but I will just finish the jacket before I
take a bite.’ He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made
bigger and bigger stitches. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they were
attracted and descended on it in hosts. ‘Hi! who invited you?’ said the
little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away. The flies, however,
who understood no German, would not be turned away, but came back
again in ever-increasing companies. The little tailor at last lost all
patience, and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table,
and saying: ‘Wait, and I will give it to you,’ struck it mercilessly on
them. When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him no fewer
than seven, dead and with legs stretched out. ‘Are you a fellow of that
sort?’ said he, and could not help admiring his own bravery. ‘The whole
town shall know of this!’ And the little tailor hastened to cut himself
a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on it in large letters: ‘Seven at
one stroke!’ ‘What, the town!’ he continued, ‘the whole world shall hear
of it!’ and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb’s tail. The tailor
put on the girdle, and resolved to go forth into the world, because he
thought his workshop was too small for his valour. Before he went away,
he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could
take with him; however, he found nothing but an old cheese, and that
he put in his pocket. In front of the door he observed a bird which
had caught itself in the thicket. It had to go into his pocket with the
cheese. Now he took to the road boldly, and as he was light and nimble,
he felt no fatigue. The road led him up a mountain, and when he had
reached the highest point of it, there sat a powerful giant looking
peacefully about him. The little tailor went bravely up, spoke to him,
and said: ‘Good day, comrade, so you are sitting there overlooking the
wide-spread world! I am just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.
Have you any inclination to go with me?’ The giant looked contemptuously
at the tailor, and said: ‘You ragamuffin! You miserable creature!’

‘Oh, indeed?’ answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat, and
showed the giant the girdle, ‘there may you read what kind of a man I
am!’ The giant read: ‘Seven at one stroke,’ and thought that they had
been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to feel a little respect
for the tiny fellow. Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took
a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out
of it. ‘Do that likewise,’ said the giant, ‘if you have strength.’ ‘Is
that all?’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play with us!’ and put his
hand into his pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until
the liquid ran out of it. ‘Faith,’ said he, ‘that was a little better,
wasn’t it?’ The giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it
of the little man. Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high
that the eye could scarcely follow it. ‘Now, little mite of a man, do
that likewise,’ ‘Well thrown,’ said the tailor, ‘but after all the stone
came down to earth again; I will throw you one which shall never come
back at all,’ and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the bird,
and threw it into the air. The bird, delighted with its liberty,
rose, flew away and did not come back. ‘How does that shot please you,
comrade?’ asked the tailor. ‘You can certainly throw,’ said the giant,
‘but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly.’ He
took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on
the ground, and said: ‘If you are strong enough, help me to carry the
tree out of the forest.’ ‘Readily,’ answered the little man; ‘take you
the trunk on your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs;
after all, they are the heaviest.’ The giant took the trunk on his
shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who
could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree, and the little
tailor into the bargain: he behind, was quite merry and happy, and
whistled the song: ‘Three tailors rode forth from the gate,’ as if
carrying the tree were child’s play. The giant, after he had dragged the
heavy burden part of the way, could go no further, and cried: ‘Hark
you, I shall have to let the tree fall!’ The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it, and said
to the giant: ‘You are such a great fellow, and yet cannot even carry
the tree!’

They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giant laid
hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging, bent it
down, gave it into the tailor’s hand, and bade him eat. But the little
tailor was much too weak to hold the tree, and when the giant let it go,
it sprang back again, and the tailor was tossed into the air with it.
When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said: ‘What is
this? Have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig?’ ‘There is no
lack of strength,’ answered the little tailor. ‘Do you think that could
be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow? I leapt over
the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
Jump as I did, if you can do it.’ The giant made the attempt but he
could not get over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so
that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand.

The giant said: ‘If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me into our
cavern and spend the night with us.’ The little tailor was willing, and
followed him. When they went into the cave, other giants were sitting
there by the fire, and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and
was eating it. The little tailor looked round and thought: ‘It is much
more spacious here than in my workshop.’ The giant showed him a bed, and
said he was to lie down in it and sleep. The bed, however, was too
big for the little tailor; he did not lie down in it, but crept into
a corner. When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the little
tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great iron bar,
cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had finished off the
grasshopper for good. With the earliest dawn the giants went into the
forest, and had quite forgotten the little tailor, when all at once he
walked up to them quite merrily and boldly. The giants were terrified,
they were afraid that he would strike them all dead, and ran away in a
great hurry.

The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
After he had walked for a long time, he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
Whilst he lay there, the people came and inspected him on all sides, and
read on his girdle: ‘Seven at one stroke.’ ‘Ah!’ said they, ‘what does
the great warrior want here in the midst of peace? He must be a mighty
lord.’ They went and announced him to the king, and gave it as their
opinion that if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful
man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart. The counsel pleased
the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer
him military service when he awoke. The ambassador remained standing by
the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
and then conveyed to him this proposal. ‘For this very reason have
I come here,’ the tailor replied, ‘I am ready to enter the king’s
service.’ He was therefore honourably received, and a special dwelling
was assigned him.

The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished
him a thousand miles away. ‘What is to be the end of this?’ they said
among themselves. ‘If we quarrel with him, and he strikes about him,
seven of us will fall at every blow; not one of us can stand against
him.’ They came therefore to a decision, betook themselves in a body to
the king, and begged for their dismissal. ‘We are not prepared,’ said
they, ‘to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke.’ The king was
sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants,
wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly
have been rid of him again. But he did not venture to give him his
dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people
dead, and place himself on the royal throne. He thought about it for a
long time, and at last found good counsel. He sent to the little tailor
and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior, he had one
request to make to him. In a forest of his country lived two giants,
who caused great mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging,
and burning, and no one could approach them without putting himself in
danger of death. If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants, he
would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his kingdom as a
dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him.
‘That would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me!’ thought the
little tailor. ‘One is not offered a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day of one’s life!’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will soon
subdue the giants, and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen
to do it; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of
two.’

The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to his followers:
‘Just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish off the giants.’ Then
he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left. After a
while he perceived both giants. They lay sleeping under a tree, and
snored so that the branches waved up and down. The little tailor, not
idle, gathered two pocketsful of stones, and with these climbed up the
tree. When he was halfway up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat
just above the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on
the breast of one of the giants. For a long time the giant felt nothing,
but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said: ‘Why are you
knocking me?’ ‘You must be dreaming,’ said the other, ‘I am not knocking
you.’ They laid themselves down to sleep again, and then the tailor
threw a stone down on the second. ‘What is the meaning of this?’ cried
the other ‘Why are you pelting me?’ ‘I am not pelting you,’ answered
the first, growling. They disputed about it for a time, but as they were
weary they let the matter rest, and their eyes closed once more. The
little tailor began his game again, picked out the biggest stone, and
threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant. ‘That
is too bad!’ cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his
companion against the tree until it shook. The other paid him back in
the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and
belaboured each other so long, that at last they both fell down dead on
the ground at the same time. Then the little tailor leapt down. ‘It is
a lucky thing,’ said he, ‘that they did not tear up the tree on which
I was sitting, or I should have had to sprint on to another like a
squirrel; but we tailors are nimble.’ He drew out his sword and gave
each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the
horsemen and said: ‘The work is done; I have finished both of them
off, but it was hard work! They tore up trees in their sore need, and
defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose when a man
like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.’ ‘But are you not
wounded?’ asked the horsemen. ‘You need not concern yourself about
that,’ answered the tailor, ‘they have not bent one hair of mine.’ The
horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; there they
found the giants swimming in their blood, and all round about lay the
torn-up trees.

The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward; he, however,
repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how he could get
rid of the hero. ‘Before you receive my daughter, and the half of my
kingdom,’ said he to him, ‘you must perform one more heroic deed. In
the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm, and you must catch
it first.’ ‘I fear one unicorn still less than two giants. Seven at one
blow, is my kind of affair.’ He took a rope and an axe with him, went
forth into the forest, and again bade those who were sent with him to
wait outside. He had not long to seek. The unicorn soon came towards
him, and rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its
horn without more ado. ‘Softly, softly; it can’t be done as quickly as
that,’ said he, and stood still and waited until the animal was quite
close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree. The unicorn ran against
the tree with all its strength, and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk
that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again, and thus it
was caught. ‘Now, I have got the bird,’ said the tailor, and came out
from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck, and then with his
axe he hewed the horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the
beast away and took it to the king.

The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third
demand. Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that
made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen should give him their
help. ‘Willingly,’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play!’ He did not
take the huntsmen with him into the forest, and they were well pleased
that he did not, for the wild boar had several times received them in
such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him. When
the boar perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the hero
fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at
once, and in one bound out again. The boar ran after him, but the tailor
ran round outside and shut the door behind it, and then the raging
beast, which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window,
was caught. The little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they
might see the prisoner with their own eyes. The hero, however, went to
the king, who was now, whether he liked it or not, obliged to keep his
promise, and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom. Had he known
that it was no warlike hero, but a little tailor who was standing before
him, it would have gone to his heart still more than it did. The wedding
was held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a tailor a
king was made.

After some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at
night: ‘Boy, make me the doublet, and patch the pantaloons, or else I
will rap the yard-measure over your ears.’ Then she discovered in what
state of life the young lord had been born, and next morning complained
of her wrongs to her father, and begged him to help her to get rid of
her husband, who was nothing else but a tailor. The king comforted her
and said: ‘Leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants
shall stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind
him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide
world.’ The woman was satisfied with this; but the king’s armour-bearer,
who had heard all, was friendly with the young lord, and informed him of
the whole plot. ‘I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little
tailor. At night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time, and
when she thought that he had fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door,
and then lay down again. The little tailor, who was only pretending to
be asleep, began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Boy, make me the doublet
and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over your
ears. I smote seven at one blow. I killed two giants, I brought away one
unicorn, and caught a wild boar, and am I to fear those who are standing
outside the room.’ When these men heard the tailor speaking thus, they
were overcome by a great dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were
behind them, and none of them would venture anything further against
him. So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his
life.




HANSEL AND GRETEL

Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his
two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had
little to bite and to break, and once when great dearth fell on the
land, he could no longer procure even daily bread. Now when he thought
over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he
groaned and said to his wife: ‘What is to become of us? How are we
to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for
ourselves?’ ‘I’ll tell you what, husband,’ answered the woman, ‘early
tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where
it is the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each
of them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and
leave them alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be
rid of them.’ ‘No, wife,’ said the man, ‘I will not do that; how can I
bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would
soon come and tear them to pieces.’ ‘O, you fool!’ said she, ‘then we
must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the planks for our
coffins,’ and she left him no peace until he consented. ‘But I feel very
sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their stepmother had said to their father. Gretel wept
bitter tears, and said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with us.’ ‘Be quiet,
Gretel,’ said Hansel, ‘do not distress yourself, I will soon find a way
to help us.’ And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put
on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon
shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like real silver pennies. Hansel stooped and stuffed the
little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in. Then he went
back and said to Gretel: ‘Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in
peace, God will not forsake us,’ and he lay down again in his bed. When
day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the
two children, saying: ‘Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the
forest to fetch wood.’ She gave each a little piece of bread, and said:
‘There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then,
for you will get nothing else.’ Gretel took the bread under her apron,
as Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket. Then they all set out together
on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short time, Hansel
stood still and peeped back at the house, and did so again and again.
His father said: ‘Hansel, what are you looking at there and staying
behind for? Pay attention, and do not forget how to use your legs.’ ‘Ah,
father,’ said Hansel, ‘I am looking at my little white cat, which is
sitting up on the roof, and wants to say goodbye to me.’ The wife said:
‘Fool, that is not your little cat, that is the morning sun which is
shining on the chimneys.’ Hansel, however, had not been looking back at
the cat, but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones
out of his pocket on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said: ‘Now,
children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not
be cold.’ Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, as high as a
little hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning
very high, the woman said: ‘Now, children, lay yourselves down by the
fire and rest, we will go into the forest and cut some wood. When we
have done, we will come back and fetch you away.’

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a little
piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they
believed that their father was near. It was not the axe, however, but
a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was
blowing backwards and forwards. And as they had been sitting such a long
time, their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When
at last they awoke, it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry and
said: ‘How are we to get out of the forest now?’ But Hansel comforted
her and said: ‘Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we
will soon find the way.’ And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took
his little sister by the hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like
newly-coined silver pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came once more
to their father’s house. They knocked at the door, and when the woman
opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: ‘You naughty
children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were
never coming back at all!’ The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut
him to the heart to leave them behind alone.

Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout the
land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to their
father: ‘Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and that
is the end. The children must go, we will take them farther into the
wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no other
means of saving ourselves!’ The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought:
‘It would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your
children.’ The woman, however, would listen to nothing that he had to
say, but scolded and reproached him. He who says A must say B, likewise,
and as he had yielded the first time, he had to do so a second time
also.

The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up, and wanted to go
out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked
the door, and Hansel could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted his
little sister, and said: ‘Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the
good God will help us.’

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their
beds. Their piece of bread was given to them, but it was still smaller
than the time before. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his
in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground.
‘Hansel, why do you stop and look round?’ said the father, ‘go on.’ ‘I
am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof, and
wants to say goodbye to me,’ answered Hansel. ‘Fool!’ said the woman,
‘that is not your little pigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining
on the chimney.’ Hansel, however little by little, threw all the crumbs
on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
the mother said: ‘Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired
you may sleep a little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in
the evening when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.’ When
it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had
scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but
no one came to the poor children. They did not awake until it was dark
night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said: ‘Just wait,
Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread
which I have strewn about, they will show us our way home again.’ When
the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many
thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up. Hansel said to Gretel: ‘We shall soon find the way,’ but
they did not find it. They walked the whole night and all the next day
too from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or three
berries, which grew on the ground. And as they were so weary that their
legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a tree and fell
asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house. They
began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if
help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it
was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough,
which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it. And
when its song was over, it spread its wings and flew away before them,
and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of
which it alighted; and when they approached the little house they saw
that it was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows
were of clear sugar. ‘We will set to work on that,’ said Hansel, ‘and
have a good meal. I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat
some of the window, it will taste sweet.’ Hansel reached up above, and
broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel leant
against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then a soft voice cried
from the parlour:

 ‘Nibble, nibble, gnaw,
  Who is nibbling at my little house?’

The children answered:

 ‘The wind, the wind,
  The heaven-born wind,’

and went on eating without disturbing themselves. Hansel, who liked the
taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, and Gretel pushed out
the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with
it. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman as old as the hills, who
supported herself on crutches, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were
so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands. The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said: ‘Oh, you dear
children, who has brought you here? do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you.’ She took them both by the hand, and led them
into her little house. Then good food was set before them, milk and
pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little
beds were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down
in them, and thought they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality
a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the
little house of bread in order to entice them there. When a child fell
into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and that was a feast
day with her. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but they have
a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when human beings draw near.
When Hansel and Gretel came into her neighbourhood, she laughed with
malice, and said mockingly: ‘I have them, they shall not escape me
again!’ Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was
already up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so
pretty, with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself: ‘That
will be a dainty mouthful!’ Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled
hand, carried him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a
grated door. Scream as he might, it would not help him. Then she went to
Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: ‘Get up, lazy thing, fetch
some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is in the
stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I will eat him.’
Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain, for she was
forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretel got nothing
but crab-shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and
cried: ‘Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon
be fat.’ Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and
the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not see it, and thought it was
Hansel’s finger, and was astonished that there was no way of fattening
him. When four weeks had gone by, and Hansel still remained thin, she
was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer. ‘Now, then,
Gretel,’ she cried to the girl, ‘stir yourself, and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I will kill him, and cook him.’ Ah,
how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water,
and how her tears did flow down her cheeks! ‘Dear God, do help us,’ she
cried. ‘If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we should
at any rate have died together.’ ‘Just keep your noise to yourself,’
said the old woman, ‘it won’t help you at all.’

Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with
the water, and light the fire. ‘We will bake first,’ said the old woman,
‘I have already heated the oven, and kneaded the dough.’ She pushed poor
Gretel out to the oven, from which flames of fire were already darting.
‘Creep in,’ said the witch, ‘and see if it is properly heated, so that
we can put the bread in.’ And once Gretel was inside, she intended to
shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.
But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said: ‘I do not know how I am
to do it; how do I get in?’ ‘Silly goose,’ said the old woman. ‘The door
is big enough; just look, I can get in myself!’ and she crept up and
thrust her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a push that drove
her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the bolt. Oh! then
she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran away and the godless
witch was miserably burnt to death.

Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable,
and cried: ‘Hansel, we are saved! The old witch is dead!’ Then Hansel
sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened. How they did
rejoice and embrace each other, and dance about and kiss each other! And
as they had no longer any need to fear her, they went into the witch’s
house, and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.
‘These are far better than pebbles!’ said Hansel, and thrust into his
pockets whatever could be got in, and Gretel said: ‘I, too, will take
something home with me,’ and filled her pinafore full. ‘But now we must
be off,’ said Hansel, ‘that we may get out of the witch’s forest.’

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great stretch of
water. ‘We cannot cross,’ said Hansel, ‘I see no foot-plank, and no
bridge.’ ‘And there is also no ferry,’ answered Gretel, ‘but a white
duck is swimming there: if I ask her, she will help us over.’ Then she
cried:

 ‘Little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
  Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee?
  There’s never a plank, or bridge in sight,
  Take us across on thy back so white.’

The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back, and told
his sister to sit by him. ‘No,’ replied Gretel, ‘that will be too heavy
for the little duck; she shall take us across, one after the other.’ The
good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and had
walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more familiar
to them, and at length they saw from afar their father’s house. Then
they began to run, rushed into the parlour, and threw themselves round
their father’s neck. The man had not known one happy hour since he had
left the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead. Gretel
emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the
room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to
add to them. Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together
in perfect happiness. My tale is done, there runs a mouse; whosoever
catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.




THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE

Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage, entered into
partnership and set up house together. For a long time all went well;
they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add
considerably to their stores. The bird’s duty was to fly daily into the
wood and bring in fuel; the mouse fetched the water, and the sausage saw
to the cooking.

When people are too well off they always begin to long for something
new. And so it came to pass, that the bird, while out one day, met a
fellow bird, to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his
household arrangements. But the other bird sneered at him for being a
poor simpleton, who did all the hard work, while the other two stayed
at home and had a good time of it. For, when the mouse had made the fire
and fetched in the water, she could retire into her little room and rest
until it was time to set the table. The sausage had only to watch the
pot to see that the food was properly cooked, and when it was near
dinner-time, he just threw himself into the broth, or rolled in and out
among the vegetables three or four times, and there they were, buttered,
and salted, and ready to be served. Then, when the bird came home and
had laid aside his burden, they sat down to table, and when they had
finished their meal, they could sleep their fill till the following
morning: and that was really a very delightful life.

Influenced by those remarks, the bird next morning refused to bring in
the wood, telling the others that he had been their servant long enough,
and had been a fool into the bargain, and that it was now time to make a
change, and to try some other way of arranging the work. Beg and pray
as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of no use; the bird remained
master of the situation, and the venture had to be made. They therefore
drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood, to the mouse
to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.

And now what happened? The sausage started in search of wood, the bird
made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited
till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day. But the
sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the bird
flew out to meet him. He had not flown far, however, when he came across
a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as his legitimate
booty, and so seized and swallowed him. The bird complained to the dog
of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said was of any avail, for
the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage, and
that was the reason his life had been forfeited.

He picked up the wood, and flew sadly home, and told the mouse all he
had seen and heard. They were both very unhappy, but agreed to make the
best of things and to remain with one another.

So now the bird set the table, and the mouse looked after the food and,
wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage, by rolling in and
out among the vegetables to salt and butter them, she jumped into the
pot; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom, having
already parted not only with her skin and hair, but also with life.

Presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner, but he
could nowhere see the cook. In his alarm and flurry, he threw the wood
here and there about the floor, called and searched, but no cook was to
be found. Then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down,
caught fire and began to blaze. The bird hastened to fetch some water,
but his pail fell into the well, and he after it, and as he was unable
to recover himself, he was drowned.




MOTHER HOLLE

Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters; one of them
was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. The mother,
however, loved the ugly and lazy one best, because she was her own
daughter, and so the other, who was only her stepdaughter, was made
to do all the work of the house, and was quite the Cinderella of the
family. Her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in
the high road, there to spin until she made her fingers bleed. Now it
chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle, and as the girl
stopped over the well to wash it off, the spindle suddenly sprang out
of her hand and fell into the well. She ran home crying to tell of her
misfortune, but her stepmother spoke harshly to her, and after giving
her a violent scolding, said unkindly, ‘As you have let the spindle fall
into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out.’

The girl went back to the well not knowing what to do, and at last in
her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle.

She remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a
beautiful meadow, full of sunshine, and with countless flowers blooming
in every direction.

She walked over the meadow, and presently she came upon a baker’s oven
full of bread, and the loaves cried out to her, ‘Take us out, take us
out, or alas! we shall be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long
ago.’ So she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out.

She went on a little farther, till she came to a tree full of apples.
‘Shake me, shake me, I pray,’ cried the tree; ‘my apples, one and all,
are ripe.’ So she shook the tree, and the apples came falling down upon
her like rain; but she continued shaking until there was not a single
apple left upon it. Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a
heap and walked on again.

The next thing she came to was a little house, and there she saw an old
woman looking out, with such large teeth, that she was terrified, and
turned to run away. But the old woman called after her, ‘What are you
afraid of, dear child? Stay with me; if you will do the work of my house
properly for me, I will make you very happy. You must be very careful,
however, to make my bed in the right way, for I wish you always to shake
it thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about; then they say, down there
in the world, that it is snowing; for I am Mother Holle.’ The old woman
spoke so kindly, that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter
into her service.

She took care to do everything according to the old woman’s bidding and
every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might, so that the
feathers flew about like so many snowflakes. The old woman was as good
as her word: she never spoke angrily to her, and gave her roast and
boiled meats every day.

So she stayed on with Mother Holle for some time, and then she began
to grow unhappy. She could not at first tell why she felt sad, but she
became conscious at last of great longing to go home; then she knew she
was homesick, although she was a thousand times better off with Mother
Holle than with her mother and sister. After waiting awhile, she went
to Mother Holle and said, ‘I am so homesick, that I cannot stay with
you any longer, for although I am so happy here, I must return to my own
people.’

Then Mother Holle said, ‘I am pleased that you should want to go back
to your own people, and as you have served me so well and faithfully, I
will take you home myself.’

Thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway. The gate
was opened, and as the girl passed through, a shower of gold fell upon
her, and the gold clung to her, so that she was covered with it from
head to foot.

‘That is a reward for your industry,’ said Mother Holle, and as she
spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well.

The gate was then closed, and the girl found herself back in the old
world close to her mother’s house. As she entered the courtyard, the
cock who was perched on the well, called out:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your golden daughter’s come back to you.’

Then she went in to her mother and sister, and as she was so richly
covered with gold, they gave her a warm welcome. She related to them
all that had happened, and when the mother heard how she had come by her
great riches, she thought she should like her ugly, lazy daughter to go
and try her fortune. So she made the sister go and sit by the well
and spin, and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a
thorn-bush, so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle; then
she threw it into the well, and jumped in herself.

Like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow, and walked over it
till she came to the oven. ‘Take us out, take us out, or alas! we shall
be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long ago,’ cried the loaves
as before. But the lazy girl answered, ‘Do you think I am going to dirty
my hands for you?’ and walked on.

Presently she came to the apple-tree. ‘Shake me, shake me, I pray; my
apples, one and all, are ripe,’ it cried. But she only answered, ‘A nice
thing to ask me to do, one of the apples might fall on my head,’ and
passed on.

At last she came to Mother Holle’s house, and as she had heard all about
the large teeth from her sister, she was not afraid of them, and engaged
herself without delay to the old woman.

The first day she was very obedient and industrious, and exerted herself
to please Mother Holle, for she thought of the gold she should get in
return. The next day, however, she began to dawdle over her work, and
the third day she was more idle still; then she began to lie in bed in
the mornings and refused to get up. Worse still, she neglected to
make the old woman’s bed properly, and forgot to shake it so that the
feathers might fly about. So Mother Holle very soon got tired of her,
and told her she might go. The lazy girl was delighted at this, and
thought to herself, ‘The gold will soon be mine.’ Mother Holle led her,
as she had led her sister, to the broad gateway; but as she was passing
through, instead of the shower of gold, a great bucketful of pitch came
pouring over her.

‘That is in return for your services,’ said the old woman, and she shut
the gate.

So the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch, and the cock on the
well called out as she saw her:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your dirty daughter’s come back to you.’

But, try what she would, she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to
her as long as she lived.




LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone
who looked at her, but most of all by her grandmother, and there was
nothing that she would not have given to the child. Once she gave her a
little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never
wear anything else; so she was always called ‘Little Red-Cap.’

One day her mother said to her: ‘Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine; take them to your grandmother, she is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot, and
when you are going, walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path,
or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will
get nothing; and when you go into her room, don’t forget to say, “Good
morning”, and don’t peep into every corner before you do it.’

‘I will take great care,’ said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and gave
her hand on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village,
and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a wolf met her. Red-Cap
did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of
him.

‘Good day, Little Red-Cap,’ said he.

‘Thank you kindly, wolf.’

‘Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?’

‘To my grandmother’s.’

‘What have you got in your apron?’

‘Cake and wine; yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick grandmother is to
have something good, to make her stronger.’

‘Where does your grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?’

‘A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood; her house stands
under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are just below; you
surely must know it,’ replied Little Red-Cap.

The wolf thought to himself: ‘What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.’ So he walked for a short time by
the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he said: ‘See, Little Red-Cap, how
pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round? I believe,
too, that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing; you
walk gravely along as if you were going to school, while everything else
out here in the wood is merry.’

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams dancing
here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing everywhere,
she thought: ‘Suppose I take grandmother a fresh nosegay; that would
please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still get there
in good time’; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for
flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a
still prettier one farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and
deeper into the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

‘Who is there?’

‘Little Red-Cap,’ replied the wolf. ‘She is bringing cake and wine; open
the door.’

‘Lift the latch,’ called out the grandmother, ‘I am too weak, and cannot
get up.’

The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,
and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she
remembered her grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that she said to
herself: ‘Oh dear! how uneasy I feel today, and at other times I like
being with grandmother so much.’ She called out: ‘Good morning,’ but
received no answer; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains.
There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face, and
looking very strange.

‘Oh! grandmother,’ she said, ‘what big ears you have!’

‘The better to hear you with, my child,’ was the reply.

‘But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.

‘The better to see you with, my dear.’

‘But, grandmother, what large hands you have!’

‘The better to hug you with.’

‘Oh! but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!’

‘The better to eat you with!’

And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was out of
bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself: ‘How the old woman is snoring! I must
just see if she wants anything.’ So he went into the room, and when he
came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it. ‘Do I find you
here, you old sinner!’ said he. ‘I have long sought you!’ Then just as
he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have
devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so he did
not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut open the stomach
of the sleeping wolf. When he had made two snips, he saw the little
Red-Cap shining, and then he made two snips more, and the little girl
sprang out, crying: ‘Ah, how frightened I have been! How dark it was
inside the wolf’; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive
also, but scarcely able to breathe. Red-Cap, however, quickly fetched
great stones with which they filled the wolf’s belly, and when he awoke,
he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at
once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the wolf’s skin and
went home with it; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which
Red-Cap had brought, and revived, but Red-Cap thought to herself: ‘As
long as I live, I will never by myself leave the path, to run into the
wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do so.’




It also related that once when Red-Cap was again taking cakes to the old
grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried to entice her from the
path. Red-Cap, however, was on her guard, and went straight forward on
her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he
had said ‘good morning’ to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes,
that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would
have eaten her up. ‘Well,’ said the grandmother, ‘we will shut the door,
that he may not come in.’ Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried:
‘Open the door, grandmother, I am Little Red-Cap, and am bringing you
some cakes.’ But they did not speak, or open the door, so the grey-beard
stole twice or thrice round the house, and at last jumped on the roof,
intending to wait until Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then to
steal after her and devour her in the darkness. But the grandmother
saw what was in his thoughts. In front of the house was a great stone
trough, so she said to the child: ‘Take the pail, Red-Cap; I made some
sausages yesterday, so carry the water in which I boiled them to the
trough.’ Red-Cap carried until the great trough was quite full. Then the
smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped down,
and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep
his footing and began to slip, and slipped down from the roof straight
into the great trough, and was drowned. But Red-Cap went joyously home,
and no one ever did anything to harm her again.




THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM

There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was
grown up, he was anxious that she should be well married and provided
for. He said to himself, ‘I will give her to the first suitable man who
comes and asks for her hand.’ Not long after a suitor appeared, and as
he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with
which to find fault, he betrothed his daughter to him. But the girl did
not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband.
She did not feel that she could trust him, and she could not look at him
nor think of him without an inward shudder. One day he said to her, ‘You
have not yet paid me a visit, although we have been betrothed for some
time.’ ‘I do not know where your house is,’ she answered. ‘My house is
out there in the dark forest,’ he said. She tried to excuse herself by
saying that she would not be able to find the way thither. Her betrothed
only replied, ‘You must come and see me next Sunday; I have already
invited guests for that day, and that you may not mistake the way, I
will strew ashes along the path.’

When Sunday came, and it was time for the girl to start, a feeling of
dread came over her which she could not explain, and that she might
be able to find her path again, she filled her pockets with peas and
lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along. On reaching the
entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes, and these
she followed, throwing down some peas on either side of her at every
step she took. She walked the whole day until she came to the deepest,
darkest part of the forest. There she saw a lonely house, looking so
grim and mysterious, that it did not please her at all. She stepped
inside, but not a soul was to be seen, and a great silence reigned
throughout. Suddenly a voice cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a
cage on the wall. Again it cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl passed on, going from room to room of the house, but they were
all empty, and still she saw no one. At last she came to the cellar,
and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her head from
shaking. ‘Can you tell me,’ asked the girl, ‘if my betrothed husband
lives here?’

‘Ah, you poor child,’ answered the old woman, ‘what a place for you to
come to! This is a murderers’ den. You think yourself a promised bride,
and that your marriage will soon take place, but it is with death that
you will keep your marriage feast. Look, do you see that large cauldron
of water which I am obliged to keep on the fire! As soon as they have
you in their power they will kill you without mercy, and cook and eat
you, for they are eaters of men. If I did not take pity on you and save
you, you would be lost.’

Thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask, which quite hid her
from view. ‘Keep as still as a mouse,’ she said; ‘do not move or speak,
or it will be all over with you. Tonight, when the robbers are
all asleep, we will flee together. I have long been waiting for an
opportunity to escape.’

The words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned,
dragging another young girl along with them. They were all drunk, and
paid no heed to her cries and lamentations. They gave her wine to drink,
three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and one of yellow,
and with that her heart gave way and she died. Then they tore off her
dainty clothing, laid her on a table, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces, and sprinkled salt upon it.

The poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the
cask, for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by
the robbers. One of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on
the little finger of the murdered girl, and as he could not draw it off
easily, he took a hatchet and cut off the finger; but the finger sprang
into the air, and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was
hiding there. The robber took a light and began looking for it, but he
could not find it. ‘Have you looked behind the large cask?’ said one of
the others. But the old woman called out, ‘Come and eat your suppers,
and let the thing be till tomorrow; the finger won’t run away.’

‘The old woman is right,’ said the robbers, and they ceased looking for
the finger and sat down.

The old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine, and before
long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar, fast asleep and
snoring. As soon as the girl was assured of this, she came from behind
the cask. She was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers, who
were lying close together, and every moment she was filled with renewed
dread lest she should awaken them. But God helped her, so that she
passed safely over them, and then she and the old woman went upstairs,
opened the door, and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers’
den. They found the ashes scattered by the wind, but the peas and
lentils had sprouted, and grown sufficiently above the ground, to guide
them in the moonlight along the path. All night long they walked, and it
was morning before they reached the mill. Then the girl told her father
all that had happened.

The day came that had been fixed for the marriage. The bridegroom
arrived and also a large company of guests, for the miller had taken
care to invite all his friends and relations. As they sat at the feast,
each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale; the bride sat still and did
not say a word.

‘And you, my love,’ said the bridegroom, turning to her, ‘is there no
tale you know? Tell us something.’

‘I will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride. ‘I went alone through a
forest and came at last to a house; not a soul could I find within, but
a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

and again a second time it said these words.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘I went on through the house from room to room, but they were all empty,
and everything was so grim and mysterious. At last I went down to the
cellar, and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her
head still. I asked her if my betrothed lived here, and she answered,
“Ah, you poor child, you are come to a murderers’ den; your betrothed
does indeed live here, but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards
cook and eat you.”’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘The old woman hid me behind a large cask, and scarcely had she done
this when the robbers returned home, dragging a young girl along with
them. They gave her three kinds of wine to drink, white, red, and
yellow, and with that she died.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘Then they tore off her dainty clothing, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces and sprinkled salt upon it.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘And one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her
finger, and as it was difficult to draw off, he took a hatchet and cut
off her finger; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the
great cask into my lap. And here is the finger with the ring.’ And
with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the
assembled guests.

The bridegroom, who during this recital had grown deadly pale, up and
tried to escape, but the guests seized him and held him fast. They
delivered him up to justice, and he and all his murderous band were
condemned to death for their wicked deeds.




TOM THUMB

A poor woodman sat in his cottage one night, smoking his pipe by the
fireside, while his wife sat by his side spinning. ‘How lonely it is,
wife,’ said he, as he puffed out a long curl of smoke, ‘for you and me
to sit here by ourselves, without any children to play about and amuse
us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children!’
‘What you say is very true,’ said the wife, sighing, and turning round
her wheel; ‘how happy should I be if I had but one child! If it were
ever so small--nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb--I should be very
happy, and love it dearly.’ Now--odd as you may think it--it came to
pass that this good woman’s wish was fulfilled, just in the very way she
had wished it; for, not long afterwards, she had a little boy, who was
quite healthy and strong, but was not much bigger than my thumb. So
they said, ‘Well, we cannot say we have not got what we wished for, and,
little as he is, we will love him dearly.’ And they called him Thomas
Thumb.

They gave him plenty of food, yet for all they could do he never grew
bigger, but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born.
Still, his eyes were sharp and sparkling, and he soon showed himself to
be a clever little fellow, who always knew well what he was about.

One day, as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut
fuel, he said, ‘I wish I had someone to bring the cart after me, for I
want to make haste.’ ‘Oh, father,’ cried Tom, ‘I will take care of that;
the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it.’ Then the woodman
laughed, and said, ‘How can that be? you cannot reach up to the horse’s
bridle.’ ‘Never mind that, father,’ said Tom; ‘if my mother will only
harness the horse, I will get into his ear and tell him which way to
go.’ ‘Well,’ said the father, ‘we will try for once.’

When the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart, and put
Tom into his ear; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how
to go, crying out, ‘Go on!’ and ‘Stop!’ as he wanted: and thus the horse
went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the
wood. It happened that as the horse was going a little too fast, and Tom
was calling out, ‘Gently! gently!’ two strangers came up. ‘What an odd
thing that is!’ said one: ‘there is a cart going along, and I hear a
carter talking to the horse, but yet I can see no one.’ ‘That is queer,
indeed,’ said the other; ‘let us follow the cart, and see where it
goes.’ So they went on into the wood, till at last they came to the
place where the woodman was. Then Tom Thumb, seeing his father, cried
out, ‘See, father, here I am with the cart, all right and safe! now take
me down!’ So his father took hold of the horse with one hand, and with
the other took his son out of the horse’s ear, and put him down upon a
straw, where he sat as merry as you please.

The two strangers were all this time looking on, and did not know what
to say for wonder. At last one took the other aside, and said, ‘That
little urchin will make our fortune, if we can get him, and carry him
about from town to town as a show; we must buy him.’ So they went up to
the woodman, and asked him what he would take for the little man. ‘He
will be better off,’ said they, ‘with us than with you.’ ‘I won’t sell
him at all,’ said the father; ‘my own flesh and blood is dearer to me
than all the silver and gold in the world.’ But Tom, hearing of the
bargain they wanted to make, crept up his father’s coat to his shoulder
and whispered in his ear, ‘Take the money, father, and let them have me;
I’ll soon come back to you.’

So the woodman at last said he would sell Tom to the strangers for a
large piece of gold, and they paid the price. ‘Where would you like to
sit?’ said one of them. ‘Oh, put me on the rim of your hat; that will be
a nice gallery for me; I can walk about there and see the country as we
go along.’ So they did as he wished; and when Tom had taken leave of his
father they took him away with them.

They journeyed on till it began to be dusky, and then the little man
said, ‘Let me get down, I’m tired.’ So the man took off his hat, and
put him down on a clod of earth, in a ploughed field by the side of the
road. But Tom ran about amongst the furrows, and at last slipped into
an old mouse-hole. ‘Good night, my masters!’ said he, ‘I’m off! mind and
look sharp after me the next time.’ Then they ran at once to the place,
and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole, but all in vain;
Tom only crawled farther and farther in; and at last it became quite
dark, so that they were forced to go their way without their prize, as
sulky as could be.

When Tom found they were gone, he came out of his hiding-place. ‘What
dangerous walking it is,’ said he, ‘in this ploughed field! If I were to
fall from one of these great clods, I should undoubtedly break my neck.’
At last, by good luck, he found a large empty snail-shell. ‘This is
lucky,’ said he, ‘I can sleep here very well’; and in he crept.

Just as he was falling asleep, he heard two men passing by, chatting
together; and one said to the other, ‘How can we rob that rich parson’s
house of his silver and gold?’ ‘I’ll tell you!’ cried Tom. ‘What noise
was that?’ said the thief, frightened; ‘I’m sure I heard someone speak.’
They stood still listening, and Tom said, ‘Take me with you, and I’ll
soon show you how to get the parson’s money.’ ‘But where are you?’ said
they. ‘Look about on the ground,’ answered he, ‘and listen where the
sound comes from.’ At last the thieves found him out, and lifted him
up in their hands. ‘You little urchin!’ they said, ‘what can you do for
us?’ ‘Why, I can get between the iron window-bars of the parson’s house,
and throw you out whatever you want.’ ‘That’s a good thought,’ said the
thieves; ‘come along, we shall see what you can do.’

When they came to the parson’s house, Tom slipped through the
window-bars into the room, and then called out as loud as he could bawl,
‘Will you have all that is here?’ At this the thieves were frightened,
and said, ‘Softly, softly! Speak low, that you may not awaken anybody.’
But Tom seemed as if he did not understand them, and bawled out again,
‘How much will you have? Shall I throw it all out?’ Now the cook lay in
the next room; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and
listened. Meantime the thieves were frightened, and ran off a little
way; but at last they plucked up their hearts, and said, ‘The little
urchin is only trying to make fools of us.’ So they came back and
whispered softly to him, saying, ‘Now let us have no more of your
roguish jokes; but throw us out some of the money.’ Then Tom called out
as loud as he could, ‘Very well! hold your hands! here it comes.’

The cook heard this quite plain, so she sprang out of bed, and ran to
open the door. The thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails: and
the maid, having groped about and found nothing, went away for a light.
By the time she came back, Tom had slipped off into the barn; and when
she had looked about and searched every hole and corner, and found
nobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her
eyes open.

The little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a snug
place to finish his night’s rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning
to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and
mother. But alas! how woefully he was undone! what crosses and sorrows
happen to us all in this world! The cook got up early, before daybreak,
to feed the cows; and going straight to the hay-loft, carried away
a large bundle of hay, with the little man in the middle of it, fast
asleep. He still, however, slept on, and did not awake till he found
himself in the mouth of the cow; for the cook had put the hay into the
cow’s rick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthful of it. ‘Good
lack-a-day!’ said he, ‘how came I to tumble into the mill?’ But he soon
found out where he really was; and was forced to have all his wits about
him, that he might not get between the cow’s teeth, and so be crushed to
death. At last down he went into her stomach. ‘It is rather dark,’ said
he; ‘they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in; a
candle would be no bad thing.’

Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters at
all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always coming
down, and the space left for him became smaller and smaller. At last he
cried out as loud as he could, ‘Don’t bring me any more hay! Don’t bring
me any more hay!’

The maid happened to be just then milking the cow; and hearing someone
speak, but seeing nobody, and yet being quite sure it was the same voice
that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off
her stool, and overset the milk-pail. As soon as she could pick herself
up out of the dirt, she ran off as fast as she could to her master the
parson, and said, ‘Sir, sir, the cow is talking!’ But the parson
said, ‘Woman, thou art surely mad!’ However, he went with her into the
cow-house, to try and see what was the matter.

Scarcely had they set foot on the threshold, when Tom called out, ‘Don’t
bring me any more hay!’ Then the parson himself was frightened; and
thinking the cow was surely bewitched, told his man to kill her on the
spot. So the cow was killed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom
lay, was thrown out upon a dunghill.

Tom soon set himself to work to get out, which was not a very easy
task; but at last, just as he had made room to get his head out, fresh
ill-luck befell him. A hungry wolf sprang out, and swallowed up the
whole stomach, with Tom in it, at one gulp, and ran away.

Tom, however, was still not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would
not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called
out, ‘My good friend, I can show you a famous treat.’ ‘Where’s that?’
said the wolf. ‘In such and such a house,’ said Tom, describing his own
father’s house. ‘You can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and
then into the pantry, and there you will find cakes, ham, beef, cold
chicken, roast pig, apple-dumplings, and everything that your heart can
wish.’

The wolf did not want to be asked twice; so that very night he went to
the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen, and then into
the pantry, and ate and drank there to his heart’s content. As soon as
he had had enough he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he could not go out by the same way he came in.

This was just what Tom had reckoned upon; and now he began to set up a
great shout, making all the noise he could. ‘Will you be easy?’ said the
wolf; ‘you’ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter.’
‘What’s that to me?’ said the little man; ‘you have had your frolic, now
I’ve a mind to be merry myself’; and he began, singing and shouting as
loud as he could.

The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through
a crack in the door; but when they saw a wolf was there, you may well
suppose that they were sadly frightened; and the woodman ran for his
axe, and gave his wife a scythe. ‘Do you stay behind,’ said the woodman,
‘and when I have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the
scythe.’ Tom heard all this, and cried out, ‘Father, father! I am here,
the wolf has swallowed me.’ And his father said, ‘Heaven be praised! we
have found our dear child again’; and he told his wife not to use the
scythe for fear she should hurt him. Then he aimed a great blow, and
struck the wolf on the head, and killed him on the spot! and when he was
dead they cut open his body, and set Tommy free. ‘Ah!’ said the father,
‘what fears we have had for you!’ ‘Yes, father,’ answered he; ‘I have
travelled all over the world, I think, in one way or other, since we
parted; and now I am very glad to come home and get fresh air again.’
‘Why, where have you been?’ said his father. ‘I have been in a
mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow’s throat--and in the
wolf’s belly; and yet here I am again, safe and sound.’

‘Well,’ said they, ‘you are come back, and we will not sell you again
for all the riches in the world.’

Then they hugged and kissed their dear little son, and gave him plenty
to eat and drink, for he was very hungry; and then they fetched new
clothes for him, for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey.
So Master Thumb stayed at home with his father and mother, in peace; for
though he had been so great a traveller, and had done and seen so many
fine things, and was fond enough of telling the whole story, he always
agreed that, after all, there’s no place like HOME!




RUMPELSTILTSKIN

By the side of a wood, in a country a long way off, ran a fine stream
of water; and upon the stream there stood a mill. The miller’s house was
close by, and the miller, you must know, had a very beautiful daughter.
She was, moreover, very shrewd and clever; and the miller was so proud
of her, that he one day told the king of the land, who used to come and
hunt in the wood, that his daughter could spin gold out of straw. Now
this king was very fond of money; and when he heard the miller’s boast
his greediness was raised, and he sent for the girl to be brought before
him. Then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great
heap of straw, and gave her a spinning-wheel, and said, ‘All this must
be spun into gold before morning, as you love your life.’ It was in vain
that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father,
for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold: the chamber
door was locked, and she was left alone.

She sat down in one corner of the room, and began to bewail her hard
fate; when on a sudden the door opened, and a droll-looking little man
hobbled in, and said, ‘Good morrow to you, my good lass; what are you
weeping for?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I must spin this straw into gold, and
I know not how.’ ‘What will you give me,’ said the hobgoblin, ‘to do it
for you?’ ‘My necklace,’ replied the maiden. He took her at her word,
and sat himself down to the wheel, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

And round about the wheel went merrily; the work was quickly done, and
the straw was all spun into gold.

When the king came and saw this, he was greatly astonished and pleased;
but his heart grew still more greedy of gain, and he shut up the poor
miller’s daughter again with a fresh task. Then she knew not what to do,
and sat down once more to weep; but the dwarf soon opened the door, and
said, ‘What will you give me to do your task?’ ‘The ring on my finger,’
said she. So her little friend took the ring, and began to work at the
wheel again, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

till, long before morning, all was done again.

The king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure;
but still he had not enough: so he took the miller’s daughter to a yet
larger heap, and said, ‘All this must be spun tonight; and if it is,
you shall be my queen.’ As soon as she was alone that dwarf came in, and
said, ‘What will you give me to spin gold for you this third time?’
‘I have nothing left,’ said she. ‘Then say you will give me,’ said
the little man, ‘the first little child that you may have when you are
queen.’ ‘That may never be,’ thought the miller’s daughter: and as she
knew no other way to get her task done, she said she would do what he
asked. Round went the wheel again to the old song, and the manikin once
more spun the heap into gold. The king came in the morning, and, finding
all he wanted, was forced to keep his word; so he married the miller’s
daughter, and she really became queen.

At the birth of her first little child she was very glad, and forgot the
dwarf, and what she had said. But one day he came into her room, where
she was sitting playing with her baby, and put her in mind of it. Then
she grieved sorely at her misfortune, and said she would give him all
the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off, but in vain; till at
last her tears softened him, and he said, ‘I will give you three days’
grace, and if during that time you tell me my name, you shall keep your
child.’

Now the queen lay awake all night, thinking of all the odd names that
she had ever heard; and she sent messengers all over the land to find
out new ones. The next day the little man came, and she began with
TIMOTHY, ICHABOD, BENJAMIN, JEREMIAH, and all the names she could
remember; but to all and each of them he said, ‘Madam, that is not my
name.’

The second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of,
BANDY-LEGS, HUNCHBACK, CROOK-SHANKS, and so on; but the little gentleman
still said to every one of them, ‘Madam, that is not my name.’

The third day one of the messengers came back, and said, ‘I have
travelled two days without hearing of any other names; but yesterday, as
I was climbing a high hill, among the trees of the forest where the fox
and the hare bid each other good night, I saw a little hut; and before
the hut burnt a fire; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was
dancing upon one leg, and singing:

 “Merrily the feast I’ll make.
  Today I’ll brew, tomorrow bake;
  Merrily I’ll dance and sing,
  For next day will a stranger bring.
  Little does my lady dream
  Rumpelstiltskin is my name!”

When the queen heard this she jumped for joy, and as soon as her little
friend came she sat down upon her throne, and called all her court round
to enjoy the fun; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her
arms, as if it was quite ready to be given up. Then the little man began
to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child, to take home with
him to his hut in the woods; and he cried out, ‘Now, lady, what is my
name?’ ‘Is it JOHN?’ asked she. ‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it TOM?’ ‘No, madam!’
‘Is it JEMMY?’ ‘It is not.’ ‘Can your name be RUMPELSTILTSKIN?’ said the
lady slyly. ‘Some witch told you that!--some witch told you that!’ cried
the little man, and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the
floor, that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it
out.

Then he made the best of his way off, while the nurse laughed and the
baby crowed; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much
trouble for nothing, and said, ‘We wish you a very good morning, and a
merry feast, Mr RUMPLESTILTSKIN!’




CLEVER GRETEL

There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with red heels, and
when she walked out with them on, she turned herself this way and that,
was quite happy and thought: ‘You certainly are a pretty girl!’ And when
she came home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught of wine,
and as wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatever she
was cooking until she was satisfied, and said: ‘The cook must know what
the food is like.’

It came to pass that the master one day said to her: ‘Gretel, there is a
guest coming this evening; prepare me two fowls very daintily.’ ‘I will
see to it, master,’ answered Gretel. She killed two fowls, scalded them,
plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them before
the fire, that they might roast. The fowls began to turn brown, and were
nearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived. Then Gretel called out
to her master: ‘If the guest does not come, I must take the fowls away
from the fire, but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten
the moment they are at their juiciest.’ The master said: ‘I will run
myself, and fetch the guest.’ When the master had turned his back,
Gretel laid the spit with the fowls on one side, and thought: ‘Standing
so long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty; who knows
when they will come? Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a
drink.’ She ran down, set a jug, said: ‘God bless it for you, Gretel,’
and took a good drink, and thought that wine should flow on, and should
not be interrupted, and took yet another hearty draught.

Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, basted them,
and drove the spit merrily round. But as the roast meat smelt so good,
Gretel thought: ‘Something might be wrong, it ought to be tasted!’
She touched it with her finger, and said: ‘Ah! how good fowls are! It
certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right
time!’ She ran to the window, to see if the master was not coming with
his guest, but she saw no one, and went back to the fowls and thought:
‘One of the wings is burning! I had better take it off and eat it.’
So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she
thought: ‘The other must go down too, or else master will observe that
something is missing.’ When the two wings were eaten, she went and
looked for her master, and did not see him. It suddenly occurred to
her: ‘Who knows? They are perhaps not coming at all, and have turned in
somewhere.’ Then she said: ‘Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has
been cut into, take another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it is
eaten you will have some peace, why should God’s good gifts be spoilt?’
So she ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the
one chicken in great glee. When one of the chickens was swallowed down,
and still her master did not come, Gretel looked at the other and said:
‘What one is, the other should be likewise, the two go together; what’s
right for the one is right for the other; I think if I were to take
another draught it would do me no harm.’ So she took another hearty
drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.

While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried: ‘Hurry
up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me!’ ‘Yes, sir, I will
soon serve up,’ answered Gretel. Meantime the master looked to see that
the table was properly laid, and took the great knife, wherewith he was
going to carve the chickens, and sharpened it on the steps. Presently
the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.
Gretel ran, and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,
she put her finger to her lips and said: ‘Hush! hush! go away as quickly
as you can, if my master catches you it will be the worse for you; he
certainly did ask you to supper, but his intention is to cut off your
two ears. Just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it!’ The guest
heard the sharpening, and hurried down the steps again as fast as he
could. Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and cried:
‘You have invited a fine guest!’ ‘Why, Gretel? What do you mean by
that?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to serve up, off the dish, and has run away with them!’ ‘That’s a
nice trick!’ said her master, and lamented the fine chickens. ‘If he had
but left me one, so that something remained for me to eat.’ He called to
him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him
with the knife still in his hand, crying: ‘Just one, just one,’ meaning
that the guest should leave him just one chicken, and not take both. The
guest, however, thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of
his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to take
them both with him.




THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON

There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears dull
of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he could hardly
hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run
out of his mouth. His son and his son’s wife were disgusted at this, so
the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove,
and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough
of it. And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of
tears. Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it
fell to the ground and broke. The young wife scolded him, but he said
nothing and only sighed. Then they brought him a wooden bowl for a few
half-pence, out of which he had to eat.

They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old
began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground. ‘What are
you doing there?’ asked the father. ‘I am making a little trough,’
answered the child, ‘for father and mother to eat out of when I am big.’

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently
began to cry. Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and
henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if he
did spill a little of anything.




THE LITTLE PEASANT

There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich
peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant. He
had not even so much as a cow, and still less money to buy one, and
yet he and his wife did so wish to have one. One day he said to her:
‘Listen, I have a good idea, there is our gossip the carpenter, he shall
make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, so that it looks like any
other, and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow.’ the woman
also liked the idea, and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed
the calf, and painted it as it ought to be, and made it with its head
hanging down as if it were eating.

Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the little peasant
called the cow-herd in and said: ‘Look, I have a little calf there,
but it is still small and has to be carried.’ The cow-herd said: ‘All
right,’ and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture, and set
it among the grass. The little calf always remained standing like one
which was eating, and the cow-herd said: ‘It will soon run by itself,
just look how it eats already!’ At night when he was going to drive the
herd home again, he said to the calf: ‘If you can stand there and eat
your fill, you can also go on your four legs; I don’t care to drag you
home again in my arms.’ But the little peasant stood at his door, and
waited for his little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows through
the village, and the calf was missing, he inquired where it was. The
cow-herd answered: ‘It is still standing out there eating. It would not
stop and come with us.’ But the little peasant said: ‘Oh, but I must
have my beast back again.’ Then they went back to the meadow together,
but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone. The cow-herd said: ‘It
must have run away.’ The peasant, however, said: ‘Don’t tell me
that,’ and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his carelessness
condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away.

And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had
so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they had no food for
it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it soon had to be killed. They
salted the flesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell
the skin there, so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds. On
the way he passed by a mill, and there sat a raven with broken wings,
and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin. But as the
weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could
go no farther, and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter. The
miller’s wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant: ‘Lay
yourself on the straw there,’ and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.
The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman
thought: ‘He is tired and has gone to sleep.’ In the meantime came the
parson; the miller’s wife received him well, and said: ‘My husband is
out, so we will have a feast.’ The peasant listened, and when he heard
them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make
shift with a slice of bread and cheese. Then the woman served up four
different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.

Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking
outside. The woman said: ‘Oh, heavens! It is my husband!’ she quickly
hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wine under the pillow,
the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, and the parson in the closet
on the porch. Then she opened the door for her husband, and said: ‘Thank
heaven, you are back again! There is such a storm, it looks as if the
world were coming to an end.’ The miller saw the peasant lying on the
straw, and asked, ‘What is that fellow doing there?’ ‘Ah,’ said the
wife, ‘the poor knave came in the storm and rain, and begged for
shelter, so I gave him a bit of bread and cheese, and showed him where
the straw was.’ The man said: ‘I have no objection, but be quick and get
me something to eat.’ The woman said: ‘But I have nothing but bread and
cheese.’ ‘I am contented with anything,’ replied the husband, ‘so far as
I am concerned, bread and cheese will do,’ and looked at the peasant and
said: ‘Come and eat some more with me.’ The peasant did not require to
be invited twice, but got up and ate. After this the miller saw the skin
in which the raven was, lying on the ground, and asked: ‘What have you
there?’ The peasant answered: ‘I have a soothsayer inside it.’ ‘Can
he foretell anything to me?’ said the miller. ‘Why not?’ answered
the peasant: ‘but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to
himself.’ The miller was curious, and said: ‘Let him foretell something
for once.’ Then the peasant pinched the raven’s head, so that he croaked
and made a noise like krr, krr. The miller said: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant answered: ‘In the first place, he says that there is some wine
hidden under the pillow.’ ‘Bless me!’ cried the miller, and went there
and found the wine. ‘Now go on,’ said he. The peasant made the raven
croak again, and said: ‘In the second place, he says that there is some
roast meat in the tiled stove.’ ‘Upon my word!’ cried the miller, and
went thither, and found the roast meat. The peasant made the raven
prophesy still more, and said: ‘Thirdly, he says that there is some
salad on the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and
went there and found the salad. At last the peasant pinched the raven
once more till he croaked, and said: ‘Fourthly, he says that there
are some cakes under the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the
miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.

And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller’s wife
was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the keys with
her. The miller would have liked much to know the fifth, but the little
peasant said: ‘First, we will quickly eat the four things, for the fifth
is something bad.’ So they ate, and after that they bargained how much
the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy, until they agreed on
three hundred talers. Then the peasant once more pinched the raven’s
head till he croaked loudly. The miller asked: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant replied: ‘He says that the Devil is hiding outside there in
the closet on the porch.’ The miller said: ‘The Devil must go out,’ and
opened the house-door; then the woman was forced to give up the keys,
and the peasant unlocked the closet. The parson ran out as fast as he
could, and the miller said: ‘It was true; I saw the black rascal with my
own eyes.’ The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak with
the three hundred talers.

At home the small peasant gradually launched out; he built a beautiful
house, and the peasants said: ‘The small peasant has certainly been to
the place where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in
shovels.’ Then the small peasant was brought before the mayor, and
bidden to say from whence his wealth came. He answered: ‘I sold my cow’s
skin in the town, for three hundred talers.’ When the peasants heard
that, they too wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed
all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in
the town to the greatest advantage. The mayor, however, said: ‘But my
servant must go first.’ When she came to the merchant in the town, he
did not give her more than two talers for a skin, and when the others
came, he did not give them so much, and said: ‘What can I do with all
these skins?’

Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus
outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused him of this
treachery before the mayor. The innocent little peasant was unanimously
sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water, in a barrel
pierced full of holes. He was led forth, and a priest was brought who
was to say a mass for his soul. The others were all obliged to retire to
a distance, and when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the
man who had been with the miller’s wife. He said to him: ‘I set you free
from the closet, set me free from the barrel.’ At this same moment up
came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had
long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried with all his might: ‘No, I
will not do it; if the whole world insists on it, I will not do it!’ The
shepherd hearing that, came up to him, and asked: ‘What are you about?
What is it that you will not do?’ The peasant said: ‘They want to make
me mayor, if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.’
The shepherd said: ‘If nothing more than that is needful in order to be
mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.’ The peasant said: ‘If you
will get in, you will be mayor.’ The shepherd was willing, and got in,
and the peasant shut the top down on him; then he took the shepherd’s
flock for himself, and drove it away. The parson went to the crowd,
and declared that the mass had been said. Then they came and rolled the
barrel towards the water. When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd
cried: ‘I am quite willing to be mayor.’ They believed no otherwise than
that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered: ‘That is
what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little down below
there,’ and they rolled the barrel down into the water.

After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering the
village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a flock of
sheep and looking quite contented. Then the peasants were astonished,
and said: ‘Peasant, from whence do you come? Have you come out of the
water?’ ‘Yes, truly,’ replied the peasant, ‘I sank deep, deep down,
until at last I got to the bottom; I pushed the bottom out of the
barrel, and crept out, and there were pretty meadows on which a number
of lambs were feeding, and from thence I brought this flock away with
me.’ Said the peasants: ‘Are there any more there?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said he,
‘more than I could want.’ Then the peasants made up their minds that
they too would fetch some sheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the
mayor said: ‘I come first.’ So they went to the water together, and just
then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, which
are called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water, whereupon
the peasants cried: ‘We already see the sheep down below!’ The mayor
pressed forward and said: ‘I will go down first, and look about me, and
if things promise well I’ll call you.’ So he jumped in; splash! went
the water; it sounded as if he were calling them, and the whole crowd
plunged in after him as one man. Then the entire village was dead, and
the small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.




FREDERICK AND CATHERINE

There was once a man called Frederick: he had a wife whose name was
Catherine, and they had not long been married. One day Frederick said.
‘Kate! I am going to work in the fields; when I come back I shall be
hungry so let me have something nice cooked, and a good draught of ale.’
‘Very well,’ said she, ‘it shall all be ready.’ When dinner-time drew
nigh, Catherine took a nice steak, which was all the meat she had, and
put it on the fire to fry. The steak soon began to look brown, and to
crackle in the pan; and Catherine stood by with a fork and turned it:
then she said to herself, ‘The steak is almost ready, I may as well go
to the cellar for the ale.’ So she left the pan on the fire and took a
large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask. The beer ran
into the jug and Catherine stood looking on. At last it popped into her
head, ‘The dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak;
that’s well thought of.’ So up she ran from the cellar; and sure enough
the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with
it.

Away ran Catherine, and away ran the dog across the field: but he ran
faster than she, and stuck close to the steak. ‘It’s all gone, and “what
can’t be cured must be endured”,’ said Catherine. So she turned round;
and as she had run a good way and was tired, she walked home leisurely
to cool herself.

Now all this time the ale was running too, for Catherine had not turned
the cock; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till
the cask was empty. When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had
happened. ‘My stars!’ said she, ‘what shall I do to keep Frederick from
seeing all this slopping about?’ So she thought a while; and at last
remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair,
and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale
nicely. ‘What a lucky thing,’ said she, ‘that we kept that meal! we have
now a good use for it.’ So away she went for it: but she managed to set
it down just upon the great jug full of beer, and upset it; and thus
all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also. ‘Ah!
well,’ said she, ‘when one goes another may as well follow.’ Then she
strewed the meal all about the cellar, and was quite pleased with her
cleverness, and said, ‘How very neat and clean it looks!’

At noon Frederick came home. ‘Now, wife,’ cried he, ‘what have you for
dinner?’ ‘O Frederick!’ answered she, ‘I was cooking you a steak; but
while I went down to draw the ale, the dog ran away with it; and while
I ran after him, the ale ran out; and when I went to dry up the ale
with the sack of meal that we got at the fair, I upset the jug: but the
cellar is now quite dry, and looks so clean!’ ‘Kate, Kate,’ said he,
‘how could you do all this?’ Why did you leave the steak to fry, and the
ale to run, and then spoil all the meal?’ ‘Why, Frederick,’ said she, ‘I
did not know I was doing wrong; you should have told me before.’

The husband thought to himself, ‘If my wife manages matters thus, I must
look sharp myself.’ Now he had a good deal of gold in the house: so he
said to Catherine, ‘What pretty yellow buttons these are! I shall put
them into a box and bury them in the garden; but take care that you
never go near or meddle with them.’ ‘No, Frederick,’ said she, ‘that
I never will.’ As soon as he was gone, there came by some pedlars with
earthenware plates and dishes, and they asked her whether she would buy.
‘Oh dear me, I should like to buy very much, but I have no money: if
you had any use for yellow buttons, I might deal with you.’ ‘Yellow
buttons!’ said they: ‘let us have a look at them.’ ‘Go into the garden
and dig where I tell you, and you will find the yellow buttons: I dare
not go myself.’ So the rogues went: and when they found what these
yellow buttons were, they took them all away, and left her plenty of
plates and dishes. Then she set them all about the house for a show:
and when Frederick came back, he cried out, ‘Kate, what have you been
doing?’ ‘See,’ said she, ‘I have bought all these with your yellow
buttons: but I did not touch them myself; the pedlars went themselves
and dug them up.’ ‘Wife, wife,’ said Frederick, ‘what a pretty piece of
work you have made! those yellow buttons were all my money: how came you
to do such a thing?’ ‘Why,’ answered she, ‘I did not know there was any
harm in it; you should have told me.’

Catherine stood musing for a while, and at last said to her husband,
‘Hark ye, Frederick, we will soon get the gold back: let us run after
the thieves.’ ‘Well, we will try,’ answered he; ‘but take some butter
and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat by the way.’
‘Very well,’ said she; and they set out: and as Frederick walked the
fastest, he left his wife some way behind. ‘It does not matter,’ thought
she: ‘when we turn back, I shall be so much nearer home than he.’

Presently she came to the top of a hill, down the side of which there
was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees
on each side as they passed. ‘Ah, see now,’ said she, ‘how they have
bruised and wounded those poor trees; they will never get well.’ So she
took pity on them, and made use of the butter to grease them all, so
that the wheels might not hurt them so much. While she was doing this
kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket, and rolled down
the hill. Catherine looked, but could not see where it had gone; so she
said, ‘Well, I suppose the other will go the same way and find you; he
has younger legs than I have.’ Then she rolled the other cheese after
it; and away it went, nobody knows where, down the hill. But she said
she supposed that they knew the road, and would follow her, and she
could not stay there all day waiting for them.

At last she overtook Frederick, who desired her to give him something to
eat. Then she gave him the dry bread. ‘Where are the butter and cheese?’
said he. ‘Oh!’ answered she, ‘I used the butter to grease those poor
trees that the wheels chafed so: and one of the cheeses ran away so I
sent the other after it to find it, and I suppose they are both on
the road together somewhere.’ ‘What a goose you are to do such silly
things!’ said the husband. ‘How can you say so?’ said she; ‘I am sure
you never told me not.’

They ate the dry bread together; and Frederick said, ‘Kate, I hope you
locked the door safe when you came away.’ ‘No,’ answered she, ‘you did
not tell me.’ ‘Then go home, and do it now before we go any farther,’
said Frederick, ‘and bring with you something to eat.’

Catherine did as he told her, and thought to herself by the way,
‘Frederick wants something to eat; but I don’t think he is very fond of
butter and cheese: I’ll bring him a bag of fine nuts, and the vinegar,
for I have often seen him take some.’

When she reached home, she bolted the back door, but the front door she
took off the hinges, and said, ‘Frederick told me to lock the door, but
surely it can nowhere be so safe if I take it with me.’ So she took
her time by the way; and when she overtook her husband she cried
out, ‘There, Frederick, there is the door itself, you may watch it as
carefully as you please.’ ‘Alas! alas!’ said he, ‘what a clever wife I
have! I sent you to make the house fast, and you take the door away, so
that everybody may go in and out as they please--however, as you have
brought the door, you shall carry it about with you for your pains.’
‘Very well,’ answered she, ‘I’ll carry the door; but I’ll not carry the
nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load; so if
you please, I’ll fasten them to the door.’

Frederick of course made no objection to that plan, and they set off
into the wood to look for the thieves; but they could not find them: and
when it grew dark, they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there.
Scarcely were they up, than who should come by but the very rogues they
were looking for. They were in truth great rascals, and belonged to that
class of people who find things before they are lost; they were tired;
so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where Frederick and
Catherine were. Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up
some stones. Then he climbed up again, and tried to hit the thieves on
the head with them: but they only said, ‘It must be near morning, for
the wind shakes the fir-apples down.’

Catherine, who had the door on her shoulder, began to be very tired;
but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy: so she said
softly, ‘Frederick, I must let the nuts go.’ ‘No,’ answered he, ‘not
now, they will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that: they must go.’ ‘Well,
then, make haste and throw them down, if you will.’ Then away rattled
the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried, ‘Bless me,
it is hailing.’

A little while after, Catherine thought the door was still very heavy:
so she whispered to Frederick, ‘I must throw the vinegar down.’ ‘Pray
don’t,’ answered he, ‘it will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that,’ said
she, ‘go it must.’ So she poured all the vinegar down; and the thieves
said, ‘What a heavy dew there is!’

At last it popped into Catherine’s head that it was the door itself that
was so heavy all the time: so she whispered, ‘Frederick, I must throw
the door down soon.’ But he begged and prayed her not to do so, for he
was sure it would betray them. ‘Here goes, however,’ said she: and down
went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves, that they cried
out ‘Murder!’ and not knowing what was coming, ran away as fast as they
could, and left all the gold. So when Frederick and Catherine came down,
there they found all their money safe and sound.




SWEETHEART ROLAND

There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was
her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated,
because she was her stepdaughter. The stepdaughter once had a pretty
apron, which the other fancied so much that she became envious, and
told her mother that she must and would have that apron. ‘Be quiet, my
child,’ said the old woman, ‘and you shall have it. Your stepsister has
long deserved death; tonight when she is asleep I will come and cut her
head off. Only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed, and
push her well to the front.’ It would have been all over with the poor
girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner, and heard
everything. All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bedtime
had come, the witch’s daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the
far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the
front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall. In
the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her right
hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside,
and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her own child’s
head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who
was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, she said
to him: ‘Listen, dearest Roland, we must fly in all haste; my stepmother
wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child. When daylight comes,
and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.’ ‘But,’ said Roland,
‘I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or we cannot escape
if she pursues us.’ The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the
dead girl’s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground, one in
front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the stairs. Then she
hurried away with her lover.

When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and
wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come. Then the witch
cried: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping,’ answered
the first drop of blood. The old woman went out, but saw no one on the
stairs, and cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here in the kitchen, I am
warming myself,’ cried the second drop of blood. She went into the
kitchen, but found no one. Then she cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Ah,
here in the bed, I am sleeping,’ cried the third drop of blood. She went
into the room to the bed. What did she see there? Her own child,
whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood. The witch fell into
a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could look forth quite far
into the world, she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her
sweetheart Roland. ‘That shall not help you,’ cried she, ‘even if you
have got a long way off, you shall still not escape me.’ She put on her
many-league boots, in which she covered an hour’s walk at every step,
and it was not long before she overtook them. The girl, however, when
she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed, with her magic
wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck
swimming in the middle of it. The witch placed herself on the shore,
threw breadcrumbs in, and went to endless trouble to entice the duck;
but the duck did not let herself be enticed, and the old woman had to
go home at night as she had come. At this the girl and her sweetheart
Roland resumed their natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole
night until daybreak. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful
flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart
Roland into a fiddler. It was not long before the witch came striding up
towards them, and said to the musician: ‘Dear musician, may I pluck that
beautiful flower for myself?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will play to
you while you do it.’ As she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was
just going to pluck the flower, knowing perfectly well who the flower
was, he began to play, and whether she would or not, she was forced
to dance, for it was a magical dance. The faster he played, the more
violent springs was she forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes
from her body, and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he
did not stop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.

As they were now set free, Roland said: ‘Now I will go to my father and
arrange for the wedding.’ ‘Then in the meantime I will stay here and
wait for you,’ said the girl, ‘and that no one may recognize me, I will
change myself into a red stone landmark.’ Then Roland went away, and the
girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved.
But when Roland got home, he fell into the snares of another, who so
fascinated him that he forgot the maiden. The poor girl remained there a
long time, but at length, as he did not return at all, she was sad, and
changed herself into a flower, and thought: ‘Someone will surely come
this way, and trample me down.’

It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw
the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with him, and
laid it away in his chest. From that time forth, strange things happened
in the shepherd’s house. When he arose in the morning, all the work was
already done, the room was swept, the table and benches cleaned, the
fire in the hearth was lighted, and the water was fetched, and at noon,
when he came home, the table was laid, and a good dinner served. He
could not conceive how this came to pass, for he never saw a human being
in his house, and no one could have concealed himself in it. He was
certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last he was so
afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice. The wise
woman said: ‘There is some enchantment behind it, listen very early some
morning if anything is moving in the room, and if you see anything, no
matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will
be stopped.’

The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day dawned,
he saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Swiftly he
sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it. Instantly the
transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,
who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this
time she had attended to his house-keeping. She told him her story,
and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she
answered: ‘No,’ for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart
Roland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised not to
go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near when Roland’s wedding was to be celebrated,
and then, according to an old custom in the country, it was announced
that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing in honour of the
bridal pair. When the faithful maiden heard of this, she grew so sad
that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go thither,
but the other girls came and took her. When it came to her turn to sing,
she stepped back, until at last she was the only one left, and then she
could not refuse. But when she began her song, and it reached Roland’s
ears, he sprang up and cried: ‘I know the voice, that is the true
bride, I will have no other!’ Everything he had forgotten, and which had
vanished from his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart. Then
the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland, and
grief came to an end and joy began.




SNOWDROP

It was the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were falling
around, that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working
at her window. The frame of the window was made of fine black ebony, and
as she sat looking out upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three
drops of blood fell upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red
drops that sprinkled the white snow, and said, ‘Would that my little
daughter may be as white as that snow, as red as that blood, and as
black as this ebony windowframe!’ And so the little girl really did grow
up; her skin was as white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and
her hair as black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.

But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who became
queen, and was very beautiful, but so vain that she could not bear
to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was. She had a fairy
looking-glass, to which she used to go, and then she would gaze upon
herself in it, and say:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass had always answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all the land.’

But Snowdrop grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years
old she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen herself.
Then the glass one day answered the queen, when she went to look in it
as usual:

 ‘Thou, queen, art fair, and beauteous to see,
  But Snowdrop is lovelier far than thee!’

When she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy, and called to
one of her servants, and said, ‘Take Snowdrop away into the wide wood,
that I may never see her any more.’ Then the servant led her away; but
his heart melted when Snowdrop begged him to spare her life, and he
said, ‘I will not hurt you, thou pretty child.’ So he left her by
herself; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would
tear her in pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off his
heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to
her fate, with the chance of someone finding and saving her.

Then poor Snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear; and
the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm. In the
evening she came to a cottage among the hills, and went in to rest, for
her little feet would carry her no further. Everything was spruce and
neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there
were seven little plates, seven little loaves, and seven little glasses
with wine in them; and seven knives and forks laid in order; and by
the wall stood seven little beds. As she was very hungry, she picked
a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each
glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest. So she
tried all the little beds; but one was too long, and another was too
short, till at last the seventh suited her: and there she laid herself
down and went to sleep.

By and by in came the masters of the cottage. Now they were seven little
dwarfs, that lived among the mountains, and dug and searched for gold.
They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw at once that all was not
right. The first said, ‘Who has been sitting on my stool?’ The second,
‘Who has been eating off my plate?’ The third, ‘Who has been picking my
bread?’ The fourth, ‘Who has been meddling with my spoon?’ The fifth,
‘Who has been handling my fork?’ The sixth, ‘Who has been cutting with
my knife?’ The seventh, ‘Who has been drinking my wine?’ Then the first
looked round and said, ‘Who has been lying on my bed?’ And the rest came
running to him, and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his
bed. But the seventh saw Snowdrop, and called all his brethren to come
and see her; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought
their lamps to look at her, and said, ‘Good heavens! what a lovely child
she is!’ And they were very glad to see her, and took care not to wake
her; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs
in turn, till the night was gone.

In the morning Snowdrop told them all her story; and they pitied her,
and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash and
knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would
take good care of her. Then they went out all day long to their work,
seeking for gold and silver in the mountains: but Snowdrop was left at
home; and they warned her, and said, ‘The queen will soon find out where
you are, so take care and let no one in.’

But the queen, now that she thought Snowdrop was dead, believed that she
must be the handsomest lady in the land; and she went to her glass and
said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the queen was very much frightened; for she knew that the glass
always spoke the truth, and was sure that the servant had betrayed her.
And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful
than she was; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar, and went
her way over the hills, to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then she
knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ Snowdrop looked
out at the window, and said, ‘Good day, good woman! what have you to
sell?’ ‘Good wares, fine wares,’ said she; ‘laces and bobbins of all
colours.’ ‘I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good
sort of body,’ thought Snowdrop, as she ran down and unbolted the door.
‘Bless me!’ said the old woman, ‘how badly your stays are laced! Let me
lace them up with one of my nice new laces.’ Snowdrop did not dream of
any mischief; so she stood before the old woman; but she set to work
so nimbly, and pulled the lace so tight, that Snowdrop’s breath was
stopped, and she fell down as if she were dead. ‘There’s an end to all
thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.

In the evening the seven dwarfs came home; and I need not say how
grieved they were to see their faithful Snowdrop stretched out upon the
ground, as if she was quite dead. However, they lifted her up, and when
they found what ailed her, they cut the lace; and in a little time she
began to breathe, and very soon came to life again. Then they said, ‘The
old woman was the queen herself; take care another time, and let no one
in when we are away.’

When the queen got home, she went straight to her glass, and spoke to it
as before; but to her great grief it still said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice, to see that
Snowdrop still lived; and she dressed herself up again, but in quite
another dress from the one she wore before, and took with her a poisoned
comb. When she reached the dwarfs’ cottage, she knocked at the door, and
cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ But Snowdrop said, ‘I dare not let anyone
in.’ Then the queen said, ‘Only look at my beautiful combs!’ and gave
her the poisoned one. And it looked so pretty, that she took it up and
put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it touched her head,
the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless. ‘There you may
lie,’ said the queen, and went her way. But by good luck the dwarfs
came in very early that evening; and when they saw Snowdrop lying on
the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon found the poisoned
comb. And when they took it away she got well, and told them all that
had passed; and they warned her once more not to open the door to
anyone.

Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and shook with rage when she
read the very same answer as before; and she said, ‘Snowdrop shall die,
if it cost me my life.’ So she went by herself into her chamber, and got
ready a poisoned apple: the outside looked very rosy and tempting, but
whoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she dressed herself up as a
peasant’s wife, and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs’ cottage,
and knocked at the door; but Snowdrop put her head out of the window and
said, ‘I dare not let anyone in, for the dwarfs have told me not.’ ‘Do
as you please,’ said the old woman, ‘but at any rate take this pretty
apple; I will give it you.’ ‘No,’ said Snowdrop, ‘I dare not take it.’
‘You silly girl!’ answered the other, ‘what are you afraid of? Do you
think it is poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the
other.’ Now the apple was so made up that one side was good, though the
other side was poisoned. Then Snowdrop was much tempted to taste, for
the apple looked so very nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she
could wait no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth,
when she fell down dead upon the ground. ‘This time nothing will save
thee,’ said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and at last it
said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest of all the fair.’

And then her wicked heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart could
be.

When evening came, and the dwarfs had gone home, they found Snowdrop
lying on the ground: no breath came from her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair, and
washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain, for the little
girl seemed quite dead. So they laid her down upon a bier, and all seven
watched and bewailed her three whole days; and then they thought they
would bury her: but her cheeks were still rosy; and her face looked just
as it did while she was alive; so they said, ‘We will never bury her in
the cold ground.’ And they made a coffin of glass, so that they might
still look at her, and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name
was, and that she was a king’s daughter. And the coffin was set among
the hills, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched. And the
birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snowdrop; and first of all came
an owl, and then a raven, and at last a dove, and sat by her side.

And thus Snowdrop lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as
though she was asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as red
as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and called at the
dwarfs’ house; and he saw Snowdrop, and read what was written in golden
letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and prayed and besought them
to let him take her away; but they said, ‘We will not part with her for
all the gold in the world.’ At last, however, they had pity on him, and
gave him the coffin; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home
with him, the piece of apple fell from between her lips, and Snowdrop
awoke, and said, ‘Where am I?’ And the prince said, ‘Thou art quite safe
with me.’

Then he told her all that had happened, and said, ‘I love you far better
than all the world; so come with me to my father’s palace, and you shall
be my wife.’ And Snowdrop consented, and went home with the prince;
and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their
wedding.

To the feast was asked, among the rest, Snowdrop’s old enemy the queen;
and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes, she looked in the
glass and said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, lady, art loveliest here, I ween;
  But lovelier far is the new-made queen.’

When she heard this she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity
were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride. And
when she got there, and saw that it was no other than Snowdrop, who, as
she thought, had been dead a long while, she choked with rage, and fell
down and died: but Snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily
over that land many, many years; and sometimes they went up into the
mountains, and paid a visit to the little dwarfs, who had been so kind
to Snowdrop in her time of need.




THE PINK

There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to
bestow on her a son or a daughter. Then an angel from heaven came to her
and said: ‘Be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of wishing,
so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he have.’ Then
she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings, and when the time
was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild
beasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream. It
happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in
her arms and she fell asleep. Then came the old cook, who knew that the
child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took a hen,
and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on the queen’s apron
and on her dress. Then he carried the child away to a secret place,
where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran to the king and
accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by
the wild beasts. When the king saw the blood on her apron, he believed
this, fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built,
in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into
it, and walled up. Here she was to stay for seven years without meat
or drink, and die of hunger. But God sent two angels from heaven in the
shape of white doves, which flew to her twice a day, and carried her
food until the seven years were over.

The cook, however, thought to himself: ‘If the child has the power of
wishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.’ So
he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to
speak, and said to him: ‘Wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with
a garden, and all else that pertains to it.’ Scarcely were the words out
of the boy’s mouth, when everything was there that he had wished for.
After a while the cook said to him: ‘It is not well for you to be so
alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.’ Then the king’s son
wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was more
beautiful than any painter could have painted her. The two played
together, and loved each other with all their hearts, and the old cook
went out hunting like a nobleman. The thought occurred to him, however,
that the king’s son might some day wish to be with his father, and thus
bring him into great peril. So he went out and took the maiden aside,
and said: ‘Tonight when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and plunge this
knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and tongue, and if you do
not do it, you shall lose your life.’ Thereupon he went away, and when
he returned next day she had not done it, and said: ‘Why should I shed
the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anyone?’ The cook once
more said: ‘If you do not do it, it shall cost you your own life.’ When
he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, and ordered her
to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laid them on a plate,
and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boy: ‘Lie down in
your bed, and draw the clothes over you.’ Then the wicked wretch came in
and said: ‘Where are the boy’s heart and tongue?’ The girl reached the
plate to him, but the king’s son threw off the quilt, and said: ‘You old
sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now will I pronounce thy sentence.
You shall become a black poodle and have a gold collar round your neck,
and shall eat burning coals, till the flames burst forth from your
throat.’ And when he had spoken these words, the old man was changed
into a poodle dog, and had a gold collar round his neck, and the cooks
were ordered to bring up some live coals, and these he ate, until the
flames broke forth from his throat. The king’s son remained there a
short while longer, and he thought of his mother, and wondered if she
were still alive. At length he said to the maiden: ‘I will go home to my
own country; if you will go with me, I will provide for you.’ ‘Ah,’
she replied, ‘the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange land
where I am unknown?’ As she did not seem quite willing, and as they
could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be changed
into a beautiful pink, and took her with him. Then he went away to his
own country, and the poodle had to run after him. He went to the tower
in which his mother was confined, and as it was so high, he wished for
a ladder which would reach up to the very top. Then he mounted up and
looked inside, and cried: ‘Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still
alive, or are you dead?’ She answered: ‘I have just eaten, and am still
satisfied,’ for she thought the angels were there. Said he: ‘I am your
dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms;
but I am alive still, and will soon set you free.’ Then he descended
again, and went to his father, and caused himself to be announced as a
strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer him service. The king said
yes, if he was skilful and could get game for him, he should come to
him, but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the
district or country. Then the huntsman promised to procure as much game
for him as he could possibly use at the royal table. So he summoned all
the huntsmen together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.
And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end
where he stationed himself, and began to wish. Two hundred deer and more
came running inside the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them.
Then they were all placed on sixty country carts, and driven home to the
king, and for once he was able to deck his table with game, after having
had none at all for years.

Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire
household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When
they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsman: ‘As you are
so clever, you shall sit by me.’ He replied: ‘Lord King, your majesty
must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.’ But the king insisted on it,
and said: ‘You shall sit by me,’ until he did it. Whilst he was sitting
there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the
king’s principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how
it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive still,
or had perished. Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began,
and said: ‘Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen
living in the tower? Is she still alive, or has she died?’ But the king
replied: ‘She let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts; I will
not have her named.’ Then the huntsman arose and said: ‘Gracious lord
father she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away
by wild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her
arms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a
chicken.’ Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said:
‘That is the wretch!’ and caused live coals to be brought, and these the
dog was compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burst
forth from its throat. On this the huntsman asked the king if he would
like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form
of the cook, in the which he stood immediately, with his white apron,
and his knife by his side. When the king saw him he fell into a passion,
and ordered him to be cast into the deepest dungeon. Then the huntsman
spoke further and said: ‘Father, will you see the maiden who brought me
up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder me, but did not do it,
though her own life depended on it?’ The king replied: ‘Yes, I would
like to see her.’ The son said: ‘Most gracious father, I will show her
to you in the form of a beautiful flower,’ and he thrust his hand into
his pocket and brought forth the pink, and placed it on the royal table,
and it was so beautiful that the king had never seen one to equal it.
Then the son said: ‘Now will I show her to you in her own form,’ and
wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood there looking so
beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so.

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower,
to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But when she was
led in she ate nothing, and said: ‘The gracious and merciful God who has
supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.’ She lived three days
more, and then died happily, and when she was buried, the two white
doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of
heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on her grave. The aged
king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces, but grief consumed the
king’s own heart, and he soon died. His son married the beautiful maiden
whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket, and whether they
are still alive or not, is known to God.




CLEVER ELSIE

There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. And
when she had grown up her father said: ‘We will get her married.’ ‘Yes,’
said the mother, ‘if only someone would come who would have her.’ At
length a man came from a distance and wooed her, who was called Hans;
but he stipulated that Clever Elsie should be really smart. ‘Oh,’ said
the father, ‘she has plenty of good sense’; and the mother said: ‘Oh,
she can see the wind coming up the street, and hear the flies coughing.’
‘Well,’ said Hans, ‘if she is not really smart, I won’t have her.’ When
they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said: ‘Elsie, go
into the cellar and fetch some beer.’ Then Clever Elsie took the pitcher
from the wall, went into the cellar, and tapped the lid briskly as she
went, so that the time might not appear long. When she was below she
fetched herself a chair, and set it before the barrel so that she had
no need to stoop, and did not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected
injury. Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and
while the beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but
looked up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a
pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally left
there.

Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said: ‘If I get Hans, and we have
a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw
beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then she
sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the
misfortune which lay before her. Those upstairs waited for the drink,
but Clever Elsie still did not come. Then the woman said to the servant:
‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie is.’ The maid went and
found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. ‘Elsie why
do you weep?’ asked the maid. ‘Ah,’ she answered, ‘have I not reason to
weep? If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to
draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his head, and kill
him.’ Then said the maid: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down
beside her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune. After a while,
as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the
beer, the man said to the boy: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie and the girl are.’ The boy went down, and there sat Clever
Elsie and the girl both weeping together. Then he asked: ‘Why are you
weeping?’ ‘Ah,’ said Elsie, ‘have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans,
and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the
pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then said the boy: ‘What
a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down by her, and likewise began to
howl loudly. Upstairs they waited for the boy, but as he still did not
return, the man said to the woman: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie is!’ The woman went down, and found all three in the midst
of their lamentations, and inquired what was the cause; then Elsie told
her also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe, when it
grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe fell down. Then said the
mother likewise: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down and wept
with them. The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not
come back and his thirst grew ever greater, he said: ‘I must go into the
cellar myself and see where Elsie is.’ But when he got into the cellar,
and they were all sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and
that Elsie’s child was the cause, and the Elsie might perhaps bring one
into the world some day, and that he might be killed by the pick-axe, if
he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing beer just at the very
time when it fell down, he cried: ‘Oh, what a clever Elsie!’ and sat
down, and likewise wept with them. The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone
for a long time; then as no one would come back he thought: ‘They must be
waiting for me below: I too must go there and see what they are about.’
When he got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each out-doing the other. ‘What misfortune has happened
then?’ asked he. ‘Ah, dear Hans,’ said Elsie, ‘if we marry each other
and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw
something to drink, then the pick-axe which has been left up there might
dash his brains out if it were to fall down, so have we not reason to
weep?’ ‘Come,’ said Hans, ‘more understanding than that is not needed
for my household, as you are such a clever Elsie, I will have you,’ and
seized her hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said: ‘Wife, I am going out to work
and earn some money for us; go into the field and cut the corn that we
may have some bread.’ ‘Yes, dear Hans, I will do that.’ After Hans had
gone away, she cooked herself some good broth and took it into the field
with her. When she came to the field she said to herself: ‘What shall I
do; shall I cut first, or shall I eat first? Oh, I will eat first.’ Then
she drank her cup of broth and when she was fully satisfied, she once
more said: ‘What shall I do? Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first?
I will sleep first.’ Then she lay down among the corn and fell asleep.
Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come; then said
he: ‘What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not
even come home to eat.’ But when evening came and she still stayed away,
Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she
was lying among the corn asleep. Then Hans hastened home and brought
a fowler’s net with little bells and hung it round about her, and she
still went on sleeping. Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat
down in his chair and worked. At length, when it was quite dark, Clever
Elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all round about
her, and the bells rang at each step which she took. Then she was
alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really was Clever Elsie or
not, and said: ‘Is it I, or is it not I?’ But she knew not what answer
to make to this, and stood for a time in doubt; at length she thought:
‘I will go home and ask if it be I, or if it be not I, they will be sure
to know.’ She ran to the door of her own house, but it was shut; then
she knocked at the window and cried: ‘Hans, is Elsie within?’ ‘Yes,’
answered Hans, ‘she is within.’ Hereupon she was terrified, and said:
‘Ah, heavens! Then it is not I,’ and went to another door; but when the
people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she
could get in nowhere. Then she ran out of the village, and no one has
seen her since.




THE MISER IN THE BUSH

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last it came
into the man’s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer;
so he went to his master, and said, ‘I have worked hard for you a long
time, I will trust to you to give me what I deserve to have for my
trouble.’ The farmer was a sad miser, and knew that his man was very
simple-hearted; so he took out threepence, and gave him for every year’s
service a penny. The poor fellow thought it was a great deal of money to
have, and said to himself, ‘Why should I work hard, and live here on bad
fare any longer? I can now travel into the wide world, and make myself
merry.’ With that he put his money into his purse, and set out, roaming
over hill and valley.

As he jogged along over the fields, singing and dancing, a little dwarf
met him, and asked him what made him so merry. ‘Why, what should make
me down-hearted?’ said he; ‘I am sound in health and rich in purse, what
should I care for? I have saved up my three years’ earnings and have it
all safe in my pocket.’ ‘How much may it come to?’ said the little man.
‘Full threepence,’ replied the countryman. ‘I wish you would give them
to me,’ said the other; ‘I am very poor.’ Then the man pitied him, and
gave him all he had; and the little dwarf said in return, ‘As you have
such a kind honest heart, I will grant you three wishes--one for every
penny; so choose whatever you like.’ Then the countryman rejoiced at
his good luck, and said, ‘I like many things better than money: first, I
will have a bow that will bring down everything I shoot at; secondly,
a fiddle that will set everyone dancing that hears me play upon it; and
thirdly, I should like that everyone should grant what I ask.’ The dwarf
said he should have his three wishes; so he gave him the bow and fiddle,
and went his way.

Our honest friend journeyed on his way too; and if he was merry before,
he was now ten times more so. He had not gone far before he met an old
miser: close by them stood a tree, and on the topmost twig sat a thrush
singing away most joyfully. ‘Oh, what a pretty bird!’ said the miser; ‘I
would give a great deal of money to have such a one.’ ‘If that’s all,’
said the countryman, ‘I will soon bring it down.’ Then he took up his
bow, and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree.
The miser crept into the bush to find it; but directly he had got into
the middle, his companion took up his fiddle and played away, and the
miser began to dance and spring about, capering higher and higher in
the air. The thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung
in rags about him, and he himself was all scratched and wounded, so that
the blood ran down. ‘Oh, for heaven’s sake!’ cried the miser, ‘Master!
master! pray let the fiddle alone. What have I done to deserve this?’
‘Thou hast shaved many a poor soul close enough,’ said the other; ‘thou
art only meeting thy reward’: so he played up another tune. Then the
miser began to beg and promise, and offered money for his liberty; but
he did not come up to the musician’s price for some time, and he danced
him along brisker and brisker, and the miser bid higher and higher, till
at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse,
and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow. When the countryman
saw so much money, he said, ‘I will agree to your proposal.’ So he took
the purse, put up his fiddle, and travelled on very pleased with his
bargain.

Meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous
plight, and began to ponder how he should take his revenge, and serve
his late companion some trick. At last he went to the judge, and
complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money, and beaten him
into the bargain; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his
back and a fiddle hung round his neck. Then the judge sent out his
officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him; and he
was soon caught and brought up to be tried.

The miser began to tell his tale, and said he had been robbed of
his money. ‘No, you gave it me for playing a tune to you.’ said the
countryman; but the judge told him that was not likely, and cut the
matter short by ordering him off to the gallows.

So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, ‘My Lord
Judge, grant me one last request.’ ‘Anything but thy life,’ replied the
other. ‘No,’ said he, ‘I do not ask my life; only to let me play upon
my fiddle for the last time.’ The miser cried out, ‘Oh, no! no! for
heaven’s sake don’t listen to him! don’t listen to him!’ But the judge
said, ‘It is only this once, he will soon have done.’ The fact was, he
could not refuse the request, on account of the dwarf’s third gift.

Then the miser said, ‘Bind me fast, bind me fast, for pity’s sake.’ But
the countryman seized his fiddle, and struck up a tune, and at the first
note judge, clerks, and jailer were in motion; all began capering, and
no one could hold the miser. At the second note the hangman let his
prisoner go, and danced also, and by the time he had played the first
bar of the tune, all were dancing together--judge, court, and miser, and
all the people who had followed to look on. At first the thing was merry
and pleasant enough; but when it had gone on a while, and there seemed
to be no end of playing or dancing, they began to cry out, and beg him
to leave off; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties,
till the judge not only gave him his life, but promised to return him
the hundred florins.

Then he called to the miser, and said, ‘Tell us now, you vagabond, where
you got that gold, or I shall play on for your amusement only,’ ‘I stole
it,’ said the miser in the presence of all the people; ‘I acknowledge
that I stole it, and that you earned it fairly.’ Then the countryman
stopped his fiddle, and left the miser to take his place at the gallows.




ASHPUTTEL

The wife of a rich man fell sick; and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bed-side, and said, ‘Always be
a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you.’ Soon
afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden;
and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always
good and kind to all about her. And the snow fell and spread a beautiful
white covering over the grave; but by the time the spring came, and the
sun had melted it away again, her father had married another wife. This
new wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her;
they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time
for the poor little girl. ‘What does the good-for-nothing want in the
parlour?’ said they; ‘they who would eat bread should first earn it;
away with the kitchen-maid!’ Then they took away her fine clothes, and
gave her an old grey frock to put on, and laughed at her, and turned her
into the kitchen.

There she was forced to do hard work; to rise early before daylight, to
bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. Besides that,
the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways, and laughed at her. In the
evening when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but was made
to lie by the hearth among the ashes; and as this, of course, made her
always dusty and dirty, they called her Ashputtel.

It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife’s daughters what he should bring them. ‘Fine clothes,’ said the
first; ‘Pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second. ‘Now, child,’ said he
to his own daughter, ‘what will you have?’ ‘The first twig, dear
father, that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come
homewards,’ said she. Then he bought for the first two the fine clothes
and pearls and diamonds they had asked for: and on his way home, as he
rode through a green copse, a hazel twig brushed against him, and almost
pushed off his hat: so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he
got home he gave it to his daughter. Then she took it, and went to
her mother’s grave and planted it there; and cried so much that it was
watered with her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree. Three
times every day she went to it and cried; and soon a little bird came
and built its nest upon the tree, and talked with her, and watched over
her, and brought her whatever she wished for.

Now it happened that the king of that land held a feast, which was to
last three days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bride for himself. Ashputtel’s two sisters were asked to come; so they
called her up, and said, ‘Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes, and tie
our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king’s feast.’
Then she did as she was told; but when all was done she could not help
crying, for she thought to herself, she should so have liked to have
gone with them to the ball; and at last she begged her mother very hard
to let her go. ‘You, Ashputtel!’ said she; ‘you who have nothing to
wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to
the ball? And when she kept on begging, she said at last, to get rid of
her, ‘I will throw this dishful of peas into the ash-heap, and if in
two hours’ time you have picked them all out, you shall go to the feast
too.’

Then she threw the peas down among the ashes, but the little maiden ran
out at the back door into the garden, and cried out:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves, flying in at the kitchen window; next
came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under
heaven, chirping and fluttering in: and they flew down into the ashes.
And the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work, pick,
pick, pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick: and among
them all they soon picked out all the good grain, and put it into a dish
but left the ashes. Long before the end of the hour the work was quite
done, and all flew out again at the windows.

Then Ashputtel brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at the thought
that now she should go to the ball. But the mother said, ‘No, no! you
slut, you have no clothes, and cannot dance; you shall not go.’ And when
Ashputtel begged very hard to go, she said, ‘If you can in one hour’s
time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shall go
too.’ And thus she thought she should at least get rid of her. So she
shook two dishes of peas into the ashes.

But the little maiden went out into the garden at the back of the house,
and cried out as before:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; next came two
turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven,
chirping and hopping about. And they flew down into the ashes; and the
little doves put their heads down and set to work, pick, pick, pick; and
then the others began pick, pick, pick; and they put all the good grain
into the dishes, and left all the ashes. Before half an hour’s time all
was done, and out they flew again. And then Ashputtel took the dishes to
her mother, rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball.
But her mother said, ‘It is all of no use, you cannot go; you have no
clothes, and cannot dance, and you would only put us to shame’: and off
she went with her two daughters to the ball.

Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Ashputtel went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree, and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine and
beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of Ashputtel,
taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt.

The king’s son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and danced
with her, and no one else: and he never left her hand; but when anyone
else came to ask her to dance, he said, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

Thus they danced till a late hour of the night; and then she wanted to
go home: and the king’s son said, ‘I shall go and take care of you to
your home’; for he wanted to see where the beautiful maiden lived. But
she slipped away from him, unawares, and ran off towards home; and as
the prince followed her, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut
the door. Then he waited till her father came home, and told him that
the unknown maiden, who had been at the feast, had hid herself in the
pigeon-house. But when they had broken open the door they found no one
within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtel was lying, as
she always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes, and her dim little
lamp was burning in the chimney. For she had run as quickly as she could
through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had there taken
off her beautiful clothes, and put them beneath the tree, that the bird
might carry them away, and had lain down again amid the ashes in her
little grey frock.

The next day when the feast was again held, and her father, mother, and
sisters were gone, Ashputtel went to the hazel-tree, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she
had worn the day before. And when she came in it to the ball, everyone
wondered at her beauty: but the king’s son, who was waiting for her,
took her by the hand, and danced with her; and when anyone asked her to
dance, he said as before, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son followed here
as before, that he might see into what house she went: but she sprang
away from him all at once into the garden behind her father’s house.
In this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit; and
Ashputtel, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it without
being seen. Then the king’s son lost sight of her, and could not find
out where she was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said
to him, ‘The unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I
think she must have sprung into the pear-tree.’ The father thought to
himself, ‘Can it be Ashputtel?’ So he had an axe brought; and they cut
down the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into
the kitchen, there lay Ashputtel among the ashes; for she had slipped
down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes
back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little grey
frock.

The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone, she
went again into the garden, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former one, and slippers which were all of gold: so that when she came
to the feast no one knew what to say, for wonder at her beauty: and the
king’s son danced with nobody but her; and when anyone else asked her to
dance, he said, ‘This lady is _my_ partner, sir.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son would go with
her, and said to himself, ‘I will not lose her this time’; but, however,
she again slipped away from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped
her left golden slipper upon the stairs.

The prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his father,
and said, ‘I will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper
fits.’ Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it; for they
had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden
slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper was, and
wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her great toe could
not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her. Then
the mother gave her a knife, and said, ‘Never mind, cut it off; when you
are queen you will not care about toes; you will not want to walk.’ So
the silly girl cut off her great toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe,
and went to the king’s son. Then he took her for his bride, and set her
beside him on his horse, and rode away with her homewards.

But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Ashputtel
had planted; and on the branch sat a little dove singing:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then the prince got down and looked at her foot; and he saw, by the
blood that streamed from it, what a trick she had played him. So he
turned his horse round, and brought the false bride back to her home,
and said, ‘This is not the right bride; let the other sister try and put
on the slipper.’ Then she went into the room and got her foot into the
shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her mother squeezed it
in till the blood came, and took her to the king’s son: and he set her
as his bride by his side on his horse, and rode away with her.

But when they came to the hazel-tree the little dove sat there still,
and sang:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then he looked down, and saw that the blood streamed so much from the
shoe, that her white stockings were quite red. So he turned his horse
and brought her also back again. ‘This is not the true bride,’ said he
to the father; ‘have you no other daughters?’ ‘No,’ said he; ‘there is
only a little dirty Ashputtel here, the child of my first wife; I am
sure she cannot be the bride.’ The prince told him to send her. But the
mother said, ‘No, no, she is much too dirty; she will not dare to show
herself.’ However, the prince would have her come; and she first washed
her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him, and he reached
her the golden slipper. Then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot,
and put on the golden slipper; and it fitted her as if it had been made
for her. And when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and
said, ‘This is the right bride.’ But the mother and both the sisters
were frightened, and turned pale with anger as he took Ashputtel on his
horse, and rode away with her. And when they came to the hazel-tree, the
white dove sang:

 ‘Home! home! look at the shoe!
  Princess! the shoe was made for you!
  Prince! prince! take home thy bride,
  For she is the true one that sits by thy side!’

And when the dove had done its song, it came flying, and perched upon
her right shoulder, and so went home with her.




THE WHITE SNAKE

A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom through
all the land. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as if news of
the most secret things was brought to him through the air. But he had a
strange custom; every day after dinner, when the table was cleared,
and no one else was present, a trusty servant had to bring him one more
dish. It was covered, however, and even the servant did not know what
was in it, neither did anyone know, for the king never took off the
cover to eat of it until he was quite alone.

This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took
away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help
carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door,
he lifted up the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish. But
when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it,
so he cut of a little bit and put it into his mouth. No sooner had it
touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices
outside his window. He went and listened, and then noticed that it was
the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one another of
all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods. Eating
the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.

Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty
servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The king ordered the man to
be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he
could before the morrow point out the thief, he himself should be looked
upon as guilty and executed. In vain he declared his innocence; he was
dismissed with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought
how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were sitting
together quietly by a brook and taking their rest; and, whilst they
were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were having a
confidential conversation together. The servant stood by and listened.
They were telling one another of all the places where they had been
waddling about all the morning, and what good food they had found; and
one said in a pitiful tone: ‘Something lies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the queen’s
window.’ The servant at once seized her by the neck, carried her to the
kitchen, and said to the cook: ‘Here is a fine duck; pray, kill her.’
‘Yes,’ said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; ‘she has spared
no trouble to fatten herself, and has been waiting to be roasted long
enough.’ So he cut off her head, and as she was being dressed for the
spit, the queen’s ring was found inside her.

The servant could now easily prove his innocence; and the king, to make
amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favour, and promised him
the best place in the court that he could wish for. The servant refused
everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as
he had a mind to see the world and go about a little. When his request
was granted he set out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he
saw three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Now, though
it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must
perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart, he got off his
horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They leapt with
delight, put out their heads, and cried to him: ‘We will remember you
and repay you for saving us!’

He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in
the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an ant-king complain: ‘Why
cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies? That stupid
horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without
mercy!’ So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to
him: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing
by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. ‘Out with you, you
idle, good-for-nothing creatures!’ cried they; ‘we cannot find food for
you any longer; you are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.’
But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground, flapping their wings, and
crying: ‘Oh, what helpless chicks we are! We must shift for ourselves,
and yet we cannot fly! What can we do, but lie here and starve?’ So the
good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword, and gave
it to them for food. Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied their
hunger, and cried: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves
another!’

And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long
way, he came to a large city. There was a great noise and crowd in
the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying aloud: ‘The king’s
daughter wants a husband; but whoever seeks her hand must perform a hard
task, and if he does not succeed he will forfeit his life.’ Many had
already made the attempt, but in vain; nevertheless when the youth
saw the king’s daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he
forgot all danger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it, before
his eyes; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the
bottom of the sea, and added: ‘If you come up again without it you will
be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves.’ All the
people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away, leaving him
alone by the sea.

He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly
he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they were the very
fishes whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in
its mouth, which it laid on the shore at the youth’s feet, and when he
had taken it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell.
Full of joy he took it to the king and expected that he would grant him
the promised reward.

But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in
birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another
task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten
sacksful of millet-seed on the grass; then she said: ‘Tomorrow morning
before sunrise these must be picked up, and not a single grain be
wanting.’

The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might be possible
to perform this task, but he could think of nothing, and there he sat
sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when he should be led to death.
But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw
all the ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single
grain was missing. The ant-king had come in the night with thousands
and thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry
picked up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.

Presently the king’s daughter herself came down into the garden, and was
amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him.
But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said: ‘Although he
has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband until he had
brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.’ The youth did not know where
the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever,
as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding
it. After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to
a wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep. But he heard a rustling in
the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time
three ravens flew down to him, perched themselves upon his knee, and
said: ‘We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving; when
we had grown big, and heard that you were seeking the Golden Apple,
we flew over the sea to the end of the world, where the Tree of Life
stands, and have brought you the apple.’ The youth, full of joy, set out
homewards, and took the Golden Apple to the king’s beautiful daughter,
who had now no more excuses left to make. They cut the Apple of Life in
two and ate it together; and then her heart became full of love for him,
and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.




THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS

There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day she
wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called all
seven to her and said: ‘Dear children, I have to go into the forest,
be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will devour you
all--skin, hair, and everything. The wretch often disguises himself, but
you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet.’ The
kids said: ‘Dear mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go
away without any anxiety.’ Then the old one bleated, and went on her way
with an easy mind.

It was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called:
‘Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.’ But the little kids knew that
it was the wolf, by the rough voice. ‘We will not open the door,’ cried
they, ‘you are not our mother. She has a soft, pleasant voice, but
your voice is rough; you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf went away to a
shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made
his voice soft with it. Then he came back, knocked at the door of the
house, and called: ‘Open the door, dear children, your mother is here
and has brought something back with her for each of you.’ But the wolf
had laid his black paws against the window, and the children saw them
and cried: ‘We will not open the door, our mother has not black feet
like you: you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf ran to a baker and said: ‘I
have hurt my feet, rub some dough over them for me.’ And when the baker
had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and said: ‘Strew some
white meal over my feet for me.’ The miller thought to himself: ‘The
wolf wants to deceive someone,’ and refused; but the wolf said: ‘If you
will not do it, I will devour you.’ Then the miller was afraid, and made
his paws white for him. Truly, this is the way of mankind.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it and said: ‘Open the door for me, children, your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something back from the
forest with her.’ The little kids cried: ‘First show us your paws that
we may know if you are our dear little mother.’ Then he put his paws
in through the window and when the kids saw that they were white, they
believed that all he said was true, and opened the door. But who should
come in but the wolf! They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the
stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the
sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But
the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the
other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest, who was in
the clock-case, was the only one he did not find. When the wolf had
satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid himself down under a
tree in the green meadow outside, and began to sleep. Soon afterwards
the old goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what a sight she saw
there! The house-door stood wide open. The table, chairs, and benches
were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts
and pillows were pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but they
were nowhere to be found. She called them one after another by name, but
no one answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice
cried: ‘Dear mother, I am in the clock-case.’ She took the kid out, and
it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. Then
you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.

At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored
so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on every side and
saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly. ‘Ah,
heavens,’ she said, ‘is it possible that my poor children whom he has
swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?’ Then the kid had to
run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and thread, and the goat cut
open the monster’s stomach, and hardly had she made one cut, than one
little kid thrust its head out, and when she had cut farther, all six
sprang out one after another, and were all still alive, and had suffered
no injury whatever, for in his greediness the monster had swallowed them
down whole. What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother,
and jumped like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said: ‘Now
go and look for some big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast’s
stomach with them while he is still asleep.’ Then the seven kids dragged
the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into this
stomach as they could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the
greatest haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once
stirred.

When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his legs,
and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to
go to a well to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the
stones in his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried
he:

 ‘What rumbles and tumbles
  Against my poor bones?
  I thought ‘twas six kids,
  But it feels like big stones.’

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he drowned miserably. When the seven
kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried aloud: ‘The wolf
is dead! The wolf is dead!’ and danced for joy round about the well with
their mother.




THE QUEEN BEE

Two kings’ sons once upon a time went into the world to seek their
fortunes; but they soon fell into a wasteful foolish way of living, so
that they could not return home again. Then their brother, who was a
little insignificant dwarf, went out to seek for his brothers: but when
he had found them they only laughed at him, to think that he, who was so
young and simple, should try to travel through the world, when they, who
were so much wiser, had been unable to get on. However, they all set
out on their journey together, and came at last to an ant-hill. The two
elder brothers would have pulled it down, in order to see how the poor
ants in their fright would run about and carry off their eggs. But the
little dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, I will not
suffer you to trouble them.’

So on they went, and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming
about. The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them. But the
dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, you shall not kill
them.’ Next they came to a bees’-nest in a hollow tree, and there was
so much honey that it ran down the trunk; and the two brothers wanted to
light a fire under the tree and kill the bees, so as to get their honey.
But the dwarf held them back, and said, ‘Let the pretty insects enjoy
themselves, I cannot let you burn them.’

At length the three brothers came to a castle: and as they passed by the
stables they saw fine horses standing there, but all were of marble, and
no man was to be seen. Then they went through all the rooms, till they
came to a door on which were three locks: but in the middle of the door
was a wicket, so that they could look into the next room. There they saw
a little grey old man sitting at a table; and they called to him once or
twice, but he did not hear: however, they called a third time, and then
he rose and came out to them.

He said nothing, but took hold of them and led them to a beautiful
table covered with all sorts of good things: and when they had eaten and
drunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chamber.

The next morning he came to the eldest and took him to a marble table,
where there were three tablets, containing an account of the means by
which the castle might be disenchanted. The first tablet said: ‘In the
wood, under the moss, lie the thousand pearls belonging to the king’s
daughter; they must all be found: and if one be missing by set of sun,
he who seeks them will be turned into marble.’

The eldest brother set out, and sought for the pearls the whole day:
but the evening came, and he had not found the first hundred: so he was
turned into stone as the tablet had foretold.

The next day the second brother undertook the task; but he succeeded no
better than the first; for he could only find the second hundred of the
pearls; and therefore he too was turned into stone.

At last came the little dwarf’s turn; and he looked in the moss; but it
was so hard to find the pearls, and the job was so tiresome!--so he sat
down upon a stone and cried. And as he sat there, the king of the ants
(whose life he had saved) came to help him, with five thousand ants; and
it was not long before they had found all the pearls and laid them in a
heap.

The second tablet said: ‘The key of the princess’s bed-chamber must be
fished up out of the lake.’ And as the dwarf came to the brink of it,
he saw the two ducks whose lives he had saved swimming about; and they
dived down and soon brought in the key from the bottom.

The third task was the hardest. It was to choose out the youngest and
the best of the king’s three daughters. Now they were all beautiful, and
all exactly alike: but he was told that the eldest had eaten a piece of
sugar, the next some sweet syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey;
so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honey.

Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the little dwarf
from the fire, and she tried the lips of all three; but at last she sat
upon the lips of the one that had eaten the honey: and so the dwarf knew
which was the youngest. Thus the spell was broken, and all who had been
turned into stones awoke, and took their proper forms. And the dwarf
married the youngest and the best of the princesses, and was king after
her father’s death; but his two brothers married the other two sisters.




THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker, who worked very hard and was very honest:
but still he could not earn enough to live upon; and at last all he
had in the world was gone, save just leather enough to make one pair of
shoes.

Then he cut his leather out, all ready to make up the next day, meaning
to rise early in the morning to his work. His conscience was clear and
his heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed,
left all his cares to Heaven, and soon fell asleep. In the morning after
he had said his prayers, he sat himself down to his work; when, to his
great wonder, there stood the shoes all ready made, upon the table. The
good man knew not what to say or think at such an odd thing happening.
He looked at the workmanship; there was not one false stitch in the
whole job; all was so neat and true, that it was quite a masterpiece.

The same day a customer came in, and the shoes suited him so well that
he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor
shoemaker, with the money, bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
In the evening he cut out the work, and went to bed early, that he might
get up and begin betimes next day; but he was saved all the trouble, for
when he got up in the morning the work was done ready to his hand. Soon
in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that he bought
leather enough for four pair more. He cut out the work again overnight
and found it done in the morning, as before; and so it went on for some
time: what was got ready in the evening was always done by daybreak, and
the good man soon became thriving and well off again.

One evening, about Christmas-time, as he and his wife were sitting over
the fire chatting together, he said to her, ‘I should like to sit up and
watch tonight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work for
me.’ The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning, and hid
themselves in a corner of the room, behind a curtain that was hung up
there, and watched what would happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came in two little naked dwarfs; and
they sat themselves upon the shoemaker’s bench, took up all the work
that was cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching
and rapping and tapping away at such a rate, that the shoemaker was all
wonder, and could not take his eyes off them. And on they went, till the
job was quite done, and the shoes stood ready for use upon the table.
This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as quick as
lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker. ‘These little wights have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them a good
turn if we can. I am quite sorry to see them run about as they do; and
indeed it is not very decent, for they have nothing upon their backs to
keep off the cold. I’ll tell you what, I will make each of them a shirt,
and a coat and waistcoat, and a pair of pantaloons into the bargain; and
do you make each of them a little pair of shoes.’

The thought pleased the good cobbler very much; and one evening, when
all the things were ready, they laid them on the table, instead of the
work that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themselves, to
watch what the little elves would do.

About midnight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped round the
room, and then went to sit down to their work as usual; but when they
saw the clothes lying for them, they laughed and chuckled, and seemed
mightily delighted.

Then they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and
capered and sprang about, as merry as could be; till at last they danced
out at the door, and away over the green.

The good couple saw them no more; but everything went well with them
from that time forward, as long as they lived.




THE JUNIPER-TREE

Long, long ago, some two thousand years or so, there lived a rich
man with a good and beautiful wife. They loved each other dearly, but
sorrowed much that they had no children. So greatly did they desire
to have one, that the wife prayed for it day and night, but still they
remained childless.

In front of the house there was a court, in which grew a juniper-tree.
One winter’s day the wife stood under the tree to peel some apples, and
as she was peeling them, she cut her finger, and the blood fell on the
snow. ‘Ah,’ sighed the woman heavily, ‘if I had but a child, as red as
blood and as white as snow,’ and as she spoke the words, her heart grew
light within her, and it seemed to her that her wish was granted, and
she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted. A month passed,
and the snow had all disappeared; then another month went by, and all
the earth was green. So the months followed one another, and first the
trees budded in the woods, and soon the green branches grew thickly
intertwined, and then the blossoms began to fall. Once again the wife
stood under the juniper-tree, and it was so full of sweet scent that her
heart leaped for joy, and she was so overcome with her happiness, that
she fell on her knees. Presently the fruit became round and firm, and
she was glad and at peace; but when they were fully ripe she picked the
berries and ate eagerly of them, and then she grew sad and ill. A little
while later she called her husband, and said to him, weeping. ‘If I
die, bury me under the juniper-tree.’ Then she felt comforted and happy
again, and before another month had passed she had a little child, and
when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood, her joy
was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the juniper-tree, and wept bitterly for
her. By degrees, however, his sorrow grew less, and although at times he
still grieved over his loss, he was able to go about as usual, and later
on he married again.

He now had a little daughter born to him; the child of his first wife
was a boy, who was as red as blood and as white as snow. The mother
loved her daughter very much, and when she looked at her and then looked
at the boy, it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in
the way of her own child, and she was continually thinking how she could
get the whole of the property for her. This evil thought took possession
of her more and more, and made her behave very unkindly to the boy. She
drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings, so that the
poor child went about in fear, and had no peace from the time he left
school to the time he went back.

One day the little daughter came running to her mother in the
store-room, and said, ‘Mother, give me an apple.’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said
the wife, and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest; the chest
had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock.

‘Mother,’ said the little daughter again, ‘may not brother have one
too?’ The mother was angry at this, but she answered, ‘Yes, when he
comes out of school.’

Just then she looked out of the window and saw him coming, and it seemed
as if an evil spirit entered into her, for she snatched the apple out
of her little daughter’s hand, and said, ‘You shall not have one before
your brother.’ She threw the apple into the chest and shut it to. The
little boy now came in, and the evil spirit in the wife made her say
kindly to him, ‘My son, will you have an apple?’ but she gave him a
wicked look. ‘Mother,’ said the boy, ‘how dreadful you look! Yes, give
me an apple.’ The thought came to her that she would kill him. ‘Come
with me,’ she said, and she lifted up the lid of the chest; ‘take one
out for yourself.’ And as he bent over to do so, the evil spirit urged
her, and crash! down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
‘If only I can prevent anyone knowing that I did it,’ she thought. So
she went upstairs to her room, and took a white handkerchief out of
her top drawer; then she set the boy’s head again on his shoulders, and
bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and placed
him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand.

Soon after this, little Marleen came up to her mother who was stirring
a pot of boiling water over the fire, and said, ‘Mother, brother is
sitting by the door with an apple in his hand, and he looks so pale;
and when I asked him to give me the apple, he did not answer, and that
frightened me.’

‘Go to him again,’ said her mother, ‘and if he does not answer, give him
a box on the ear.’ So little Marleen went, and said, ‘Brother, give me
that apple,’ but he did not say a word; then she gave him a box on the
ear, and his head rolled off. She was so terrified at this, that she ran
crying and screaming to her mother. ‘Oh!’ she said, ‘I have knocked off
brother’s head,’ and then she wept and wept, and nothing would stop her.

‘What have you done!’ said her mother, ‘but no one must know about it,
so you must keep silence; what is done can’t be undone; we will make
him into puddings.’ And she took the little boy and cut him up, made him
into puddings, and put him in the pot. But Marleen stood looking on,
and wept and wept, and her tears fell into the pot, so that there was no
need of salt.

Presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner; he asked,
‘Where is my son?’ The mother said nothing, but gave him a large dish of
black pudding, and Marleen still wept without ceasing.

The father again asked, ‘Where is my son?’

‘Oh,’ answered the wife, ‘he is gone into the country to his mother’s
great uncle; he is going to stay there some time.’

‘What has he gone there for, and he never even said goodbye to me!’

‘Well, he likes being there, and he told me he should be away quite six
weeks; he is well looked after there.’

‘I feel very unhappy about it,’ said the husband, ‘in case it should not
be all right, and he ought to have said goodbye to me.’

With this he went on with his dinner, and said, ‘Little Marleen, why do
you weep? Brother will soon be back.’ Then he asked his wife for more
pudding, and as he ate, he threw the bones under the table.

Little Marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of
her bottom drawer, and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the
table and carried them outside, and all the time she did nothing but
weep. Then she laid them in the green grass under the juniper-tree, and
she had no sooner done so, then all her sadness seemed to leave her,
and she wept no more. And now the juniper-tree began to move, and the
branches waved backwards and forwards, first away from one another, and
then together again, as it might be someone clapping their hands for
joy. After this a mist came round the tree, and in the midst of it there
was a burning as of fire, and out of the fire there flew a beautiful
bird, that rose high into the air, singing magnificently, and when it
could no more be seen, the juniper-tree stood there as before, and the
silk handkerchief and the bones were gone.

Little Marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were
still alive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to
the table and ate.

The bird flew away and alighted on the house of a goldsmith and began to
sing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain, when he heard the
song of the bird on his roof. He thought it so beautiful that he got
up and ran out, and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his
slippers. But he ran on into the middle of the street, with a slipper on
one foot and a sock on the other; he still had on his apron, and still
held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands, and so he stood gazing
up at the bird, while the sun came shining brightly down on the street.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing! Sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ said the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing. Give that gold
chain, and I will sing it you again.’

‘Here is the chain, take it,’ said the goldsmith. ‘Only sing me that
again.’

The bird flew down and took the gold chain in his right claw, and then
he alighted again in front of the goldsmith and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

Then he flew away, and settled on the roof of a shoemaker’s house and
sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The shoemaker heard him, and he jumped up and ran out in his
shirt-sleeves, and stood looking up at the bird on the roof with his
hand over his eyes to keep himself from being blinded by the sun.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing!’ Then he called through the
door to his wife: ‘Wife, come out; here is a bird, come and look at it
and hear how beautifully it sings.’ Then he called his daughter and the
children, then the apprentices, girls and boys, and they all ran up the
street to look at the bird, and saw how splendid it was with its red
and green feathers, and its neck like burnished gold, and eyes like two
bright stars in its head.

‘Bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something.’

‘Wife,’ said the man, ‘go into the garret; on the upper shelf you will
see a pair of red shoes; bring them to me.’ The wife went in and fetched
the shoes.

‘There, bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘now sing me that song again.’

The bird flew down and took the red shoes in his left claw, and then he
went back to the roof and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

When he had finished, he flew away. He had the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left, and he flew right away to a mill, and the
mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click clack.’ Inside the mill were
twenty of the miller’s men hewing a stone, and as they went ‘Hick hack,
hick hack, hick hack,’ the mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click
clack.’

The bird settled on a lime-tree in front of the mill and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

then one of the men left off,

  My father grieved when I was gone;

two more men left off and listened,

  My sister loved me best of all;

then four more left off,

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

now there were only eight at work,

  Underneath

And now only five,

  the juniper-tree.

And now only one,

  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

then he looked up and the last one had left off work.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful song that is you sing! Let me hear it
too; sing it again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; give me that
millstone, and I will sing it again.’

‘If it belonged to me alone,’ said the man, ‘you should have it.’

‘Yes, yes,’ said the others: ‘if he will sing again, he can have it.’

The bird came down, and all the twenty millers set to and lifted up the
stone with a beam; then the bird put his head through the hole and took
the stone round his neck like a collar, and flew back with it to the
tree and sang--

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And when he had finished his song, he spread his wings, and with the
chain in his right claw, the shoes in his left, and the millstone round
his neck, he flew right away to his father’s house.

The father, the mother, and little Marleen were having their dinner.

‘How lighthearted I feel,’ said the father, ‘so pleased and cheerful.’

‘And I,’ said the mother, ‘I feel so uneasy, as if a heavy thunderstorm
were coming.’

But little Marleen sat and wept and wept.

Then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof.

‘I do feel so happy,’ said the father, ‘and how beautifully the sun
shines; I feel just as if I were going to see an old friend again.’

‘Ah!’ said the wife, ‘and I am so full of distress and uneasiness that
my teeth chatter, and I feel as if there were a fire in my veins,’ and
she tore open her dress; and all the while little Marleen sat in the
corner and wept, and the plate on her knees was wet with her tears.

The bird now flew to the juniper-tree and began singing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

the mother shut her eyes and her ears, that she might see and hear
nothing, but there was a roaring sound in her ears like that of a
violent storm, and in her eyes a burning and flashing like lightning:

  My father grieved when I was gone;

‘Look, mother,’ said the man, ‘at the beautiful bird that is singing so
magnificently; and how warm and bright the sun is, and what a delicious
scent of spice in the air!’

  My sister loved me best of all;

then little Marleen laid her head down on her knees and sobbed.

‘I must go outside and see the bird nearer,’ said the man.

‘Ah, do not go!’ cried the wife. ‘I feel as if the whole house were in
flames!’

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

 She laid her kerchief over me,
 And took my bones that they might lie
 Underneath the juniper-tree
 Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it fell just round the
man’s neck, so that it fitted him exactly.

He went inside, and said, ‘See, what a splendid bird that is; he has
given me this beautiful gold chain, and looks so beautiful himself.’

But the wife was in such fear and trouble, that she fell on the floor,
and her cap fell from her head.

Then the bird began again:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

‘Ah me!’ cried the wife, ‘if I were but a thousand feet beneath the
earth, that I might not hear that song.’

  My father grieved when I was gone;

then the woman fell down again as if dead.

  My sister loved me best of all;

‘Well,’ said little Marleen, ‘I will go out too and see if the bird will
give me anything.’

So she went out.

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

and he threw down the shoes to her,

  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And she now felt quite happy and lighthearted; she put on the shoes and
danced and jumped about in them. ‘I was so miserable,’ she said, ‘when I
came out, but that has all passed away; that is indeed a splendid bird,
and he has given me a pair of red shoes.’

The wife sprang up, with her hair standing out from her head like flames
of fire. ‘Then I will go out too,’ she said, ‘and see if it will lighten
my misery, for I feel as if the world were coming to an end.’

But as she crossed the threshold, crash! the bird threw the millstone
down on her head, and she was crushed to death.

The father and little Marleen heard the sound and ran out, but they only
saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot, and when these had
passed, there stood the little brother, and he took the father and
little Marleen by the hand; then they all three rejoiced, and went
inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate.




THE TURNIP

There were two brothers who were both soldiers; the one was rich and
the other poor. The poor man thought he would try to better himself; so,
pulling off his red coat, he became a gardener, and dug his ground well,
and sowed turnips.

When the seed came up, there was one plant bigger than all the rest; and
it kept getting larger and larger, and seemed as if it would never cease
growing; so that it might have been called the prince of turnips for
there never was such a one seen before, and never will again. At last it
was so big that it filled a cart, and two oxen could hardly draw it; and
the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it, nor whether it
would be a blessing or a curse to him. One day he said to himself, ‘What
shall I do with it? if I sell it, it will bring no more than another;
and for eating, the little turnips are better than this; the best thing
perhaps is to carry it and give it to the king as a mark of respect.’

Then he yoked his oxen, and drew the turnip to the court, and gave it
to the king. ‘What a wonderful thing!’ said the king; ‘I have seen many
strange things, but such a monster as this I never saw. Where did you
get the seed? or is it only your good luck? If so, you are a true child
of fortune.’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the gardener, ‘I am no child of fortune;
I am a poor soldier, who never could get enough to live upon; so I
laid aside my red coat, and set to work, tilling the ground. I have a
brother, who is rich, and your majesty knows him well, and all the world
knows him; but because I am poor, everybody forgets me.’

The king then took pity on him, and said, ‘You shall be poor no
longer. I will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your
brother.’ Then he gave him gold and lands and flocks, and made him so
rich that his brother’s fortune could not at all be compared with his.

When the brother heard of all this, and how a turnip had made the
gardener so rich, he envied him sorely, and bethought himself how he
could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself. However, he
determined to manage more cleverly than his brother, and got together a
rich present of gold and fine horses for the king; and thought he must
have a much larger gift in return; for if his brother had received so
much for only a turnip, what must his present be worth?

The king took the gift very graciously, and said he knew not what to
give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip; so
the soldier was forced to put it into a cart, and drag it home with him.
When he reached home, he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite;
and at length wicked thoughts came into his head, and he resolved to
kill his brother.

So he hired some villains to murder him; and having shown them where to
lie in ambush, he went to his brother, and said, ‘Dear brother, I have
found a hidden treasure; let us go and dig it up, and share it between
us.’ The other had no suspicions of his roguery: so they went out
together, and as they were travelling along, the murderers rushed out
upon him, bound him, and were going to hang him on a tree.

But whilst they were getting all ready, they heard the trampling of a
horse at a distance, which so frightened them that they pushed their
prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack, and swung him up by a
cord to the tree, where they left him dangling, and ran away. Meantime
he worked and worked away, till he made a hole large enough to put out
his head.

When the horseman came up, he proved to be a student, a merry fellow,
who was journeying along on his nag, and singing as he went. As soon as
the man in the sack saw him passing under the tree, he cried out, ‘Good
morning! good morning to thee, my friend!’ The student looked about
everywhere; and seeing no one, and not knowing where the voice came
from, cried out, ‘Who calls me?’

Then the man in the tree answered, ‘Lift up thine eyes, for behold here
I sit in the sack of wisdom; here have I, in a short time, learned great
and wondrous things. Compared to this seat, all the learning of the
schools is as empty air. A little longer, and I shall know all that man
can know, and shall come forth wiser than the wisest of mankind. Here
I discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars; the laws
that control the winds; the number of the sands on the seashore; the
healing of the sick; the virtues of all simples, of birds, and of
precious stones. Wert thou but once here, my friend, though wouldst feel
and own the power of knowledge.

The student listened to all this and wondered much; at last he said,
‘Blessed be the day and hour when I found you; cannot you contrive to
let me into the sack for a little while?’ Then the other answered, as if
very unwillingly, ‘A little space I may allow thee to sit here, if thou
wilt reward me well and entreat me kindly; but thou must tarry yet an
hour below, till I have learnt some little matters that are yet unknown
to me.’

So the student sat himself down and waited a while; but the time hung
heavy upon him, and he begged earnestly that he might ascend forthwith,
for his thirst for knowledge was great. Then the other pretended to give
way, and said, ‘Thou must let the sack of wisdom descend, by untying
yonder cord, and then thou shalt enter.’ So the student let him down,
opened the sack, and set him free. ‘Now then,’ cried he, ‘let me ascend
quickly.’ As he began to put himself into the sack heels first, ‘Wait a
while,’ said the gardener, ‘that is not the way.’ Then he pushed him
in head first, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the searcher after
wisdom dangling in the air. ‘How is it with thee, friend?’ said he,
‘dost thou not feel that wisdom comes unto thee? Rest there in peace,
till thou art a wiser man than thou wert.’

So saying, he trotted off on the student’s nag, and left the poor fellow
to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down.




CLEVER HANS

The mother of Hans said: ‘Whither away, Hans?’ Hans answered: ‘To
Gretel.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’
‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day,
Hans. What do you bring that is good?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want to have
something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a needle, Hans says:
‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart
home. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’
‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing; had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a needle.’ ‘Where is the
needle, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in the hay-cart.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans. You
should have stuck the needle in your sleeve.’ ‘Never mind, I’ll do
better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is
good?’ ‘I bring nothing. I want to have something given to me.’ Gretel
presents Hans with a knife. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans
takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. ‘Good evening,
mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ What
did you take her?’ ‘Took her nothing, she gave me something.’ ‘What did
Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a knife.’ ‘Where is the knife, Hans?’ ‘Stuck
in my sleeve.’ ‘That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in
your pocket.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a young goat. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans takes
the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he gets home it
is suffocated. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have
you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing, she
gave me something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me a goat.’
‘Where is the goat, Hans?’ ‘Put it in my pocket.’ ‘That was ill done,
Hans, you should have put a rope round the goat’s neck.’ ‘Never mind,
will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a piece of bacon. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away behind him.
The dogs come and devour the bacon. When he gets home, he has the rope
in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging on to it. ‘Good
evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took her nothing, she gave me
something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a bit of bacon.’ ‘Where
is the bacon, Hans?’ ‘I tied it to a rope, brought it home, dogs took
it.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans, you should have carried the bacon on your
head.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel.
‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I
bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel presents Hans
with a calf. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his face.
‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took nothing, but had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘A calf.’ ‘Where have you the
calf, Hans?’ ‘I set it on my head and it kicked my face.’ ‘That was
ill done, Hans, you should have led the calf, and put it in the stall.’
‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good
thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’
Gretel says to Hans: ‘I will go with you.’

Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and binds
her fast. Then Hans goes to his mother. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good
evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take
her?’ ‘I took her nothing.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me
nothing, she came with me.’ ‘Where have you left Gretel?’ ‘I led her by
the rope, tied her to the rack, and scattered some grass for her.’ ‘That
was ill done, Hans, you should have cast friendly eyes on her.’ ‘Never
mind, will do better.’

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves’ and sheep’s eyes,
and threw them in Gretel’s face. Then Gretel became angry, tore herself
loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.




THE THREE LANGUAGES

An aged count once lived in Switzerland, who had an only son, but he
was stupid, and could learn nothing. Then said the father: ‘Hark you,
my son, try as I will I can get nothing into your head. You must go from
hence, I will give you into the care of a celebrated master, who shall
see what he can do with you.’ The youth was sent into a strange town,
and remained a whole year with the master. At the end of this time,
he came home again, and his father asked: ‘Now, my son, what have you
learnt?’ ‘Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.’ ‘Lord
have mercy on us!’ cried the father; ‘is that all you have learnt? I
will send you into another town, to another master.’ The youth was taken
thither, and stayed a year with this master likewise. When he came back
the father again asked: ‘My son, what have you learnt?’ He answered:
‘Father, I have learnt what the birds say.’ Then the father fell into a
rage and said: ‘Oh, you lost man, you have spent the precious time and
learnt nothing; are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes? I will
send you to a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also, I
will no longer be your father.’ The youth remained a whole year with the
third master also, and when he came home again, and his father inquired:
‘My son, what have you learnt?’ he answered: ‘Dear father, I have this
year learnt what the frogs croak.’ Then the father fell into the most
furious anger, sprang up, called his people thither, and said: ‘This man
is no longer my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him
out into the forest, and kill him.’ They took him forth, but when they
should have killed him, they could not do it for pity, and let him go,
and they cut the eyes and tongue out of a deer that they might carry
them to the old man as a token.

The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he
begged for a night’s lodging. ‘Yes,’ said the lord of the castle, ‘if
you will pass the night down there in the old tower, go thither; but I
warn you, it is at the peril of your life, for it is full of wild dogs,
which bark and howl without stopping, and at certain hours a man has to
be given to them, whom they at once devour.’ The whole district was in
sorrow and dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anything to
stop this. The youth, however, was without fear, and said: ‘Just let me
go down to the barking dogs, and give me something that I can throw to
them; they will do nothing to harm me.’ As he himself would have it so,
they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the
tower. When he went inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged
their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and
did not hurt one hair of his head. Next morning, to the astonishment of
everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said to the lord of
the castle: ‘The dogs have revealed to me, in their own language, why
they dwell there, and bring evil on the land. They are bewitched, and
are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower,
and they can have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise
learnt, from their discourse, how that is to be done.’ Then all who
heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him
as a son if he accomplished it successfully. He went down again, and
as he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought a chest
full of gold out with him. The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth
heard no more; they had disappeared, and the country was freed from the
trouble.

After some time he took it in his head that he would travel to Rome. On
the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of frogs were sitting
croaking. He listened to them, and when he became aware of what they
were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad. At last he arrived in
Rome, where the Pope had just died, and there was great doubt among
the cardinals as to whom they should appoint as his successor. They at
length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be
distinguished by some divine and miraculous token. And just as that was
decided on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two
snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The
ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above, and asked him on
the spot if he would be pope. He was undecided, and knew not if he were
worthy of this, but the doves counselled him to do it, and at length he
said yes. Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled
what he had heard from the frogs on his way, which had so affected him,
that he was to be his Holiness the Pope. Then he had to sing a mass, and
did not know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his
shoulders, and said it all in his ear.




THE FOX AND THE CAT

It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to
herself: ‘He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the
world,’ she spoke to him in a friendly way. ‘Good day, dear Mr Fox,
how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting on in these hard
times?’ The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from
head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would give
any answer or not. At last he said: ‘Oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you
piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of? Have
you the cheek to ask how I am getting on? What have you learnt? How
many arts do you understand?’ ‘I understand but one,’ replied the
cat, modestly. ‘What art is that?’ asked the fox. ‘When the hounds are
following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself.’ ‘Is that all?’
said the fox. ‘I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain
a sackful of cunning. You make me sorry for you; come with me, I will
teach you how people get away from the hounds.’ Just then came a hunter
with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top
of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. ‘Open your
sack, Mr Fox, open your sack,’ cried the cat to him, but the dogs had
already seized him, and were holding him fast. ‘Ah, Mr Fox,’ cried the
cat. ‘You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been
able to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.’




THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS

‘Dear children,’ said a poor man to his four sons, ‘I have nothing to
give you; you must go out into the wide world and try your luck. Begin
by learning some craft or another, and see how you can get on.’ So the
four brothers took their walking-sticks in their hands, and their little
bundles on their shoulders, and after bidding their father goodbye, went
all out at the gate together. When they had got on some way they came
to four crossways, each leading to a different country. Then the eldest
said, ‘Here we must part; but this day four years we will come back
to this spot, and in the meantime each must try what he can do for
himself.’

So each brother went his way; and as the eldest was hastening on a man
met him, and asked him where he was going, and what he wanted. ‘I am
going to try my luck in the world, and should like to begin by learning
some art or trade,’ answered he. ‘Then,’ said the man, ‘go with me, and
I will teach you to become the cunningest thief that ever was.’ ‘No,’
said the other, ‘that is not an honest calling, and what can one look
to earn by it in the end but the gallows?’ ‘Oh!’ said the man, ‘you need
not fear the gallows; for I will only teach you to steal what will be
fair game: I meddle with nothing but what no one else can get or care
anything about, and where no one can find you out.’ So the young man
agreed to follow his trade, and he soon showed himself so clever, that
nothing could escape him that he had once set his mind upon.

The second brother also met a man, who, when he found out what he was
setting out upon, asked him what craft he meant to follow. ‘I do not
know yet,’ said he. ‘Then come with me, and be a star-gazer. It is a
noble art, for nothing can be hidden from you, when once you understand
the stars.’ The plan pleased him much, and he soon became such a skilful
star-gazer, that when he had served out his time, and wanted to leave
his master, he gave him a glass, and said, ‘With this you can see all
that is passing in the sky and on earth, and nothing can be hidden from
you.’

The third brother met a huntsman, who took him with him, and taught him
so well all that belonged to hunting, that he became very clever in the
craft of the woods; and when he left his master he gave him a bow, and
said, ‘Whatever you shoot at with this bow you will be sure to hit.’

The youngest brother likewise met a man who asked him what he wished to
do. ‘Would not you like,’ said he, ‘to be a tailor?’ ‘Oh, no!’ said
the young man; ‘sitting cross-legged from morning to night, working
backwards and forwards with a needle and goose, will never suit me.’
‘Oh!’ answered the man, ‘that is not my sort of tailoring; come with me,
and you will learn quite another kind of craft from that.’ Not knowing
what better to do, he came into the plan, and learnt tailoring from the
beginning; and when he left his master, he gave him a needle, and said,
‘You can sew anything with this, be it as soft as an egg or as hard as
steel; and the joint will be so fine that no seam will be seen.’

After the space of four years, at the time agreed upon, the four
brothers met at the four cross-roads; and having welcomed each other,
set off towards their father’s home, where they told him all that had
happened to them, and how each had learned some craft.

Then, one day, as they were sitting before the house under a very high
tree, the father said, ‘I should like to try what each of you can do in
this way.’ So he looked up, and said to the second son, ‘At the top of
this tree there is a chaffinch’s nest; tell me how many eggs there are
in it.’ The star-gazer took his glass, looked up, and said, ‘Five.’
‘Now,’ said the father to the eldest son, ‘take away the eggs without
letting the bird that is sitting upon them and hatching them know
anything of what you are doing.’ So the cunning thief climbed up the
tree, and brought away to his father the five eggs from under the bird;
and it never saw or felt what he was doing, but kept sitting on at its
ease. Then the father took the eggs, and put one on each corner of the
table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, ‘Cut all
the eggs in two pieces at one shot.’ The huntsman took up his bow, and
at one shot struck all the five eggs as his father wished.

‘Now comes your turn,’ said he to the young tailor; ‘sew the eggs and
the young birds in them together again, so neatly that the shot shall
have done them no harm.’ Then the tailor took his needle, and sewed the
eggs as he was told; and when he had done, the thief was sent to take
them back to the nest, and put them under the bird without its knowing
it. Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they
crawled out, and had only a little red streak across their necks, where
the tailor had sewn them together.

‘Well done, sons!’ said the old man; ‘you have made good use of your
time, and learnt something worth the knowing; but I am sure I do not
know which ought to have the prize. Oh, that a time might soon come for
you to turn your skill to some account!’

Not long after this there was a great bustle in the country; for the
king’s daughter had been carried off by a mighty dragon, and the king
mourned over his loss day and night, and made it known that whoever
brought her back to him should have her for a wife. Then the four
brothers said to each other, ‘Here is a chance for us; let us try
what we can do.’ And they agreed to see whether they could not set the
princess free. ‘I will soon find out where she is, however,’ said the
star-gazer, as he looked through his glass; and he soon cried out, ‘I
see her afar off, sitting upon a rock in the sea, and I can spy the
dragon close by, guarding her.’ Then he went to the king, and asked for
a ship for himself and his brothers; and they sailed together over the
sea, till they came to the right place. There they found the princess
sitting, as the star-gazer had said, on the rock; and the dragon was
lying asleep, with his head upon her lap. ‘I dare not shoot at him,’
said the huntsman, ‘for I should kill the beautiful young lady also.’
‘Then I will try my skill,’ said the thief, and went and stole her away
from under the dragon, so quietly and gently that the beast did not know
it, but went on snoring.

Then away they hastened with her full of joy in their boat towards the
ship; but soon came the dragon roaring behind them through the air; for
he awoke and missed the princess. But when he got over the boat, and
wanted to pounce upon them and carry off the princess, the huntsman took
up his bow and shot him straight through the heart so that he fell down
dead. They were still not safe; for he was such a great beast that in
his fall he overset the boat, and they had to swim in the open sea
upon a few planks. So the tailor took his needle, and with a few large
stitches put some of the planks together; and he sat down upon these,
and sailed about and gathered up all pieces of the boat; and then tacked
them together so quickly that the boat was soon ready, and they then
reached the ship and got home safe.

When they had brought home the princess to her father, there was great
rejoicing; and he said to the four brothers, ‘One of you shall marry
her, but you must settle amongst yourselves which it is to be.’ Then
there arose a quarrel between them; and the star-gazer said, ‘If I had
not found the princess out, all your skill would have been of no use;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘Your seeing her would have been of
no use,’ said the thief, ‘if I had not taken her away from the dragon;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘No, she is mine,’ said the huntsman;
‘for if I had not killed the dragon, he would, after all, have torn you
and the princess into pieces.’ ‘And if I had not sewn the boat together
again,’ said the tailor, ‘you would all have been drowned, therefore she
is mine.’ Then the king put in a word, and said, ‘Each of you is right;
and as all cannot have the young lady, the best way is for neither of
you to have her: for the truth is, there is somebody she likes a great
deal better. But to make up for your loss, I will give each of you, as a
reward for his skill, half a kingdom.’ So the brothers agreed that this
plan would be much better than either quarrelling or marrying a lady who
had no mind to have them. And the king then gave to each half a kingdom,
as he had said; and they lived very happily the rest of their days, and
took good care of their father; and somebody took better care of the
young lady, than to let either the dragon or one of the craftsmen have
her again.




LILY AND THE LION

A merchant, who had three daughters, was once setting out upon a
journey; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should
bring back for her. The eldest wished for pearls; the second for jewels;
but the third, who was called Lily, said, ‘Dear father, bring me a
rose.’ Now it was no easy task to find a rose, for it was the middle
of winter; yet as she was his prettiest daughter, and was very fond of
flowers, her father said he would try what he could do. So he kissed all
three, and bid them goodbye.

And when the time came for him to go home, he had bought pearls and
jewels for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for the
rose; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing, the
people laughed at him, and asked him whether he thought roses grew in
snow. This grieved him very much, for Lily was his dearest child; and as
he was journeying home, thinking what he should bring her, he came to a
fine castle; and around the castle was a garden, in one half of which it
seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter. On one side the
finest flowers were in full bloom, and on the other everything looked
dreary and buried in the snow. ‘A lucky hit!’ said he, as he called to
his servant, and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was
there, and bring him away one of the finest flowers.

This done, they were riding away well pleased, when up sprang a fierce
lion, and roared out, ‘Whoever has stolen my roses shall be eaten up
alive!’ Then the man said, ‘I knew not that the garden belonged to you;
can nothing save my life?’ ‘No!’ said the lion, ‘nothing, unless you
undertake to give me whatever meets you on your return home; if you
agree to this, I will give you your life, and the rose too for your
daughter.’ But the man was unwilling to do so and said, ‘It may be my
youngest daughter, who loves me most, and always runs to meet me when
I go home.’ Then the servant was greatly frightened, and said, ‘It may
perhaps be only a cat or a dog.’ And at last the man yielded with a
heavy heart, and took the rose; and said he would give the lion whatever
should meet him first on his return.

And as he came near home, it was Lily, his youngest and dearest
daughter, that met him; she came running, and kissed him, and welcomed
him home; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose, she was
still more glad. But her father began to be very sorrowful, and to weep,
saying, ‘Alas, my dearest child! I have bought this flower at a high
price, for I have said I would give you to a wild lion; and when he has
you, he will tear you in pieces, and eat you.’ Then he told her all that
had happened, and said she should not go, let what would happen.

But she comforted him, and said, ‘Dear father, the word you have given
must be kept; I will go to the lion, and soothe him: perhaps he will let
me come safe home again.’

The next morning she asked the way she was to go, and took leave of her
father, and went forth with a bold heart into the wood. But the lion was
an enchanted prince. By day he and all his court were lions, but in the
evening they took their right forms again. And when Lily came to the
castle, he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him. The
wedding-feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time. The
prince was only to be seen as soon as evening came, and then he held his
court; but every morning he left his bride, and went away by himself,
she knew not whither, till the night came again.

After some time he said to her, ‘Tomorrow there will be a great feast in
your father’s house, for your eldest sister is to be married; and if
you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither.’ Then she
rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more, and set
out with the lions; and everyone was overjoyed to see her, for they had
thought her dead long since. But she told them how happy she was, and
stayed till the feast was over, and then went back to the wood.

Her second sister was soon after married, and when Lily was asked to
go to the wedding, she said to the prince, ‘I will not go alone this
time--you must go with me.’ But he would not, and said that it would be
a very hazardous thing; for if the least ray of the torch-light should
fall upon him his enchantment would become still worse, for he should be
changed into a dove, and be forced to wander about the world for seven
long years. However, she gave him no rest, and said she would take care
no light should fall upon him. So at last they set out together, and
took with them their little child; and she chose a large hall with thick
walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted; but,
unluckily, no one saw that there was a crack in the door. Then the
wedding was held with great pomp, but as the train came from the church,
and passed with the torches before the hall, a very small ray of light
fell upon the prince. In a moment he disappeared, and when his wife came
in and looked for him, she found only a white dove; and it said to her,
‘Seven years must I fly up and down over the face of the earth, but
every now and then I will let fall a white feather, that will show you
the way I am going; follow it, and at last you may overtake and set me
free.’

This said, he flew out at the door, and poor Lily followed; and every
now and then a white feather fell, and showed her the way she was to
journey. Thus she went roving on through the wide world, and looked
neither to the right hand nor to the left, nor took any rest, for seven
years. Then she began to be glad, and thought to herself that the time
was fast coming when all her troubles should end; yet repose was still
far off, for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white
feather, and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove.
‘Now,’ thought she to herself, ‘no aid of man can be of use to me.’ So
she went to the sun and said, ‘Thou shinest everywhere, on the hill’s
top and the valley’s depth--hast thou anywhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the sun, ‘I have not seen it; but I will give thee a
casket--open it when thy hour of need comes.’

So she thanked the sun, and went on her way till eventide; and when
the moon arose, she cried unto it, and said, ‘Thou shinest through the
night, over field and grove--hast thou nowhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the moon, ‘I cannot help thee but I will give thee an
egg--break it when need comes.’

Then she thanked the moon, and went on till the night-wind blew; and she
raised up her voice to it, and said, ‘Thou blowest through every tree
and under every leaf--hast thou not seen my white dove?’ ‘No,’ said the
night-wind, ‘but I will ask three other winds; perhaps they have seen
it.’ Then the east wind and the west wind came, and said they too had
not seen it, but the south wind said, ‘I have seen the white dove--he
has fled to the Red Sea, and is changed once more into a lion, for the
seven years are passed away, and there he is fighting with a dragon;
and the dragon is an enchanted princess, who seeks to separate him from
you.’ Then the night-wind said, ‘I will give thee counsel. Go to the
Red Sea; on the right shore stand many rods--count them, and when thou
comest to the eleventh, break it off, and smite the dragon with it; and
so the lion will have the victory, and both of them will appear to you
in their own forms. Then look round and thou wilt see a griffin, winged
like bird, sitting by the Red Sea; jump on to his back with thy beloved
one as quickly as possible, and he will carry you over the waters to
your home. I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night-wind.
‘When you are half-way over, throw it down, and out of the waters will
immediately spring up a high nut-tree on which the griffin will be able
to rest, otherwise he would not have the strength to bear you the whole
way; if, therefore, thou dost forget to throw down the nut, he will let
you both fall into the sea.’

So our poor wanderer went forth, and found all as the night-wind had
said; and she plucked the eleventh rod, and smote the dragon, and the
lion forthwith became a prince, and the dragon a princess again. But
no sooner was the princess released from the spell, than she seized
the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin’s back, and went off
carrying the prince away with her.

Thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn; but she
took heart and said, ‘As far as the wind blows, and so long as the cock
crows, I will journey on, till I find him once again.’ She went on for
a long, long way, till at length she came to the castle whither the
princess had carried the prince; and there was a feast got ready, and
she heard that the wedding was about to be held. ‘Heaven aid me now!’
said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given her, and found
that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself. So she put it
on, and went into the palace, and all the people gazed upon her; and
the dress pleased the bride so much that she asked whether it was to be
sold. ‘Not for gold and silver.’ said she, ‘but for flesh and blood.’
The princess asked what she meant, and she said, ‘Let me speak with the
bridegroom this night in his chamber, and I will give thee the dress.’
At last the princess agreed, but she told her chamberlain to give the
prince a sleeping draught, that he might not hear or see her. When
evening came, and the prince had fallen asleep, she was led into
his chamber, and she sat herself down at his feet, and said: ‘I have
followed thee seven years. I have been to the sun, the moon, and the
night-wind, to seek thee, and at last I have helped thee to overcome
the dragon. Wilt thou then forget me quite?’ But the prince all the time
slept so soundly, that her voice only passed over him, and seemed like
the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees.

Then poor Lily was led away, and forced to give up the golden dress; and
when she saw that there was no help for her, she went out into a meadow,
and sat herself down and wept. But as she sat she bethought herself of
the egg that the moon had given her; and when she broke it, there ran
out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold, that played about, and then
nestled under the old one’s wings, so as to form the most beautiful
sight in the world. And she rose up and drove them before her, till the
bride saw them from her window, and was so pleased that she came forth
and asked her if she would sell the brood. ‘Not for gold or silver, but
for flesh and blood: let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom
in his chamber, and I will give thee the whole brood.’

Then the princess thought to betray her as before, and agreed to
what she asked: but when the prince went to his chamber he asked
the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night. And the
chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught, and
how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber, and was
to come again that night. Then the prince took care to throw away the
sleeping draught; and when Lily came and began again to tell him what
woes had befallen her, and how faithful and true to him she had been,
he knew his beloved wife’s voice, and sprang up, and said, ‘You have
awakened me as from a dream, for the strange princess had thrown a spell
around me, so that I had altogether forgotten you; but Heaven hath sent
you to me in a lucky hour.’

And they stole away out of the palace by night unawares, and seated
themselves on the griffin, who flew back with them over the Red Sea.
When they were half-way across Lily let the nut fall into the water,
and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea, whereon the griffin
rested for a while, and then carried them safely home. There they found
their child, now grown up to be comely and fair; and after all their
troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days.




THE FOX AND THE HORSE

A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to
him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would give him
nothing more to eat, and said, ‘I want you no longer, so take yourself
off out of my stable; I shall not take you back again until you are
stronger than a lion.’ Then he opened the door and turned him adrift.

The poor horse was very melancholy, and wandered up and down in the
wood, seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain. Presently
a fox met him: ‘What’s the matter, my friend?’ said he, ‘why do you hang
down your head and look so lonely and woe-begone?’ ‘Ah!’ replied the
horse, ‘justice and avarice never dwell in one house; my master has
forgotten all that I have done for him so many years, and because I
can no longer work he has turned me adrift, and says unless I become
stronger than a lion he will not take me back again; what chance can I
have of that? he knows I have none, or he would not talk so.’

However, the fox bid him be of good cheer, and said, ‘I will help you;
lie down there, stretch yourself out quite stiff, and pretend to be
dead.’ The horse did as he was told, and the fox went straight to the
lion who lived in a cave close by, and said to him, ‘A little way off
lies a dead horse; come with me and you may make an excellent meal of
his carcase.’ The lion was greatly pleased, and set off immediately; and
when they came to the horse, the fox said, ‘You will not be able to eat
him comfortably here; I’ll tell you what--I will tie you fast to
his tail, and then you can draw him to your den, and eat him at your
leisure.’

This advice pleased the lion, so he laid himself down quietly for the
fox to make him fast to the horse. But the fox managed to tie his legs
together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he
could not set himself free. When the work was done, the fox clapped the
horse on the shoulder, and said, ‘Jip! Dobbin! Jip!’ Then up he sprang,
and moved off, dragging the lion behind him. The beast began to roar
and bellow, till all the birds of the wood flew away for fright; but the
horse let him sing on, and made his way quietly over the fields to his
master’s house.

‘Here he is, master,’ said he, ‘I have got the better of him’: and when
the farmer saw his old servant, his heart relented, and he said. ‘Thou
shalt stay in thy stable and be well taken care of.’ And so the poor old
horse had plenty to eat, and lived--till he died.




THE BLUE LIGHT

There was once upon a time a soldier who for many years had served the
king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer
because of the many wounds which he had received. The king said to him:
‘You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not
receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me
service for them.’ Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living,
went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the
evening he entered a forest. When darkness came on, he saw a light,
which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch. ‘Do give
me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,’ said he to
her, ‘or I shall starve.’ ‘Oho!’ she answered, ‘who gives anything to a
run-away soldier? Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you
will do what I wish.’ ‘What do you wish?’ said the soldier. ‘That you
should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.’ The soldier consented,
and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by
the evening. ‘I see well enough,’ said the witch, ‘that you can do no
more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in payment for
which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small.’ The
soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch
proposed that he should stay one night more. ‘Tomorrow, you shall only
do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an old
dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and never goes
out, and you shall bring it up again.’ Next day the old woman took him
to the well, and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light, and
made her a signal to draw him up again. She did draw him up, but when he
came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the
blue light away from him. ‘No,’ said he, perceiving her evil intention,
‘I will not give you the light until I am standing with both feet upon
the ground.’ The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the
well, and went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue
light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? He saw very well
that he could not escape death. He sat for a while very sorrowfully,
then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which
was still half full. ‘This shall be my last pleasure,’ thought he,
pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke. When the
smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood
before him, and said: ‘Lord, what are your commands?’ ‘What my commands
are?’ replied the soldier, quite astonished. ‘I must do everything you
bid me,’ said the little man. ‘Good,’ said the soldier; ‘then in the
first place help me out of this well.’ The little man took him by the
hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget
to take the blue light with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the
treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the
soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said
to the little man: ‘Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before
the judge.’ In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild
tom-cat and screaming frightfully. Nor was it long before the little man
reappeared. ‘It is all done,’ said he, ‘and the witch is already hanging
on the gallows. What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
‘At this moment, none,’ answered the soldier; ‘you can return home, only
be at hand immediately, if I summon you.’ ‘Nothing more is needed than
that you should light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear
before you at once.’ Thereupon he vanished from his sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he came. He went to the
best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord
furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it was ready and the
soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black manikin
and said: ‘I have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me,
and left me to hunger, and now I want to take my revenge.’ ‘What am I to
do?’ asked the little man. ‘Late at night, when the king’s daughter is
in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for
me.’ The manikin said: ‘That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very
dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.’
When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the manikin
carried in the princess. ‘Aha! are you there?’ cried the soldier, ‘get
to your work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.’ When
she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he
stretched out his feet and said: ‘Pull off my boots,’ and then he
threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean
and brighten them. She, however, did everything he bade her, without
opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes. When the first cock
crowed, the manikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her
in her bed.

Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream. ‘I was carried through the
streets with the rapidity of lightning,’ said she, ‘and taken into a
soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his
room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a
dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.’
‘The dream may have been true,’ said the king. ‘I will give you a piece
of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in the
pocket, and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and
leave a track in the streets.’ But unseen by the king, the manikin was
standing beside him when he said that, and heard all. At night when
the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas
certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the
crafty manikin had just before scattered peas in every street there
was. And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until
cock-crow.

Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it was
all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting, picking up
peas, and saying: ‘It must have rained peas, last night.’ ‘We must think
of something else,’ said the king; ‘keep your shoes on when you go to
bed, and before you come back from the place where you are taken, hide
one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it.’ The black manikin
heard this plot, and at night when the soldier again ordered him to
bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told him that he knew of no
expedient to counteract this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found
in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him. ‘Do what I bid you,’
replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged
to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under
the bed.

Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s
shoe. It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the
entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back,
and thrown into prison. In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable
things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in
his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of
his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. The
soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to
him: ‘Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have left lying in
the inn, and I will give you a ducat for doing it.’ His comrade ran
thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone
again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black manikin. ‘Have no
fear,’ said the latter to his master. ‘Go wheresoever they take you, and
let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.’ Next day
the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge
condemned him to death. When he was led forth to die, he begged a last
favour of the king. ‘What is it?’ asked the king. ‘That I may smoke one
more pipe on my way.’ ‘You may smoke three,’ answered the king, ‘but do
not imagine that I will spare your life.’ Then the soldier pulled out
his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths
of smoke had ascended, the manikin was there with a small cudgel in his
hand, and said: ‘What does my lord command?’ ‘Strike down to earth that
false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has
treated me so ill.’ Then the manikin fell on them like lightning,
darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched by
his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again. The king
was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to
be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and his
daughter to wife.




THE RAVEN

There was once a queen who had a little daughter, still too young to run
alone. One day the child was very troublesome, and the mother could not
quiet it, do what she would. She grew impatient, and seeing the ravens
flying round the castle, she opened the window, and said: ‘I wish you
were a raven and would fly away, then I should have a little peace.’
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the child in her arms was
turned into a raven, and flew away from her through the open window. The
bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time,
and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child.

Long after this, a man was making his way through the wood when he heard
a raven calling, and he followed the sound of the voice. As he drew
near, the raven said, ‘I am by birth a king’s daughter, but am now under
the spell of some enchantment; you can, however, set me free.’ ‘What
am I to do?’ he asked. She replied, ‘Go farther into the wood until you
come to a house, wherein lives an old woman; she will offer you food and
drink, but you must not take of either; if you do, you will fall into
a deep sleep, and will not be able to help me. In the garden behind the
house is a large tan-heap, and on that you must stand and watch for me.
I shall drive there in my carriage at two o’clock in the afternoon for
three successive days; the first day it will be drawn by four white, the
second by four chestnut, and the last by four black horses; but if you
fail to keep awake and I find you sleeping, I shall not be set free.’

The man promised to do all that she wished, but the raven said, ‘Alas! I
know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable
to save me.’ The man assured her again that he would on no account touch
a thing to eat or drink.

When he came to the house and went inside, the old woman met him, and
said, ‘Poor man! how tired you are! Come in and rest and let me give you
something to eat and drink.’

‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I will neither eat not drink.’

But she would not leave him alone, and urged him saying, ‘If you will
not eat anything, at least you might take a draught of wine; one drink
counts for nothing,’ and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded, and
drank.

As it drew towards the appointed hour, he went outside into the garden
and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven. Suddenly a feeling of
fatigue came over him, and unable to resist it, he lay down for a little
while, fully determined, however, to keep awake; but in another minute
his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell into such a deep sleep,
that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him. At two
o’clock the raven came driving along, drawn by her four white horses;
but even before she reached the spot, she said to herself, sighing, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep.’ When she entered the garden, there she found
him as she had feared, lying on the tan-heap, fast asleep. She got out
of her carriage and went to him; she called him and shook him, but it
was all in vain, he still continued sleeping.

The next day at noon, the old woman came to him again with food and
drink which he at first refused. At last, overcome by her persistent
entreaties that he would take something, he lifted the glass and drank
again.

Towards two o’clock he went into the garden and on to the tan-heap to
watch for the raven. He had not been there long before he began to feel
so tired that his limbs seemed hardly able to support him, and he could
not stand upright any longer; so again he lay down and fell fast asleep.
As the raven drove along her four chestnut horses, she said sorrowfully
to herself, ‘I know he has fallen asleep.’ She went as before to look
for him, but he slept, and it was impossible to awaken him.

The following day the old woman said to him, ‘What is this? You are not
eating or drinking anything, do you want to kill yourself?’

He answered, ‘I may not and will not either eat or drink.’

But she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him,
and when he smelt the wine, he was unable to resist the temptation, and
took a deep draught.

When the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in
the garden to await the king’s daughter, but he felt even more overcome
with weariness than on the two previous days, and throwing himself down,
he slept like a log. At two o’clock the raven could be seen approaching,
and this time her coachman and everything about her, as well as her
horses, were black.

She was sadder than ever as she drove along, and said mournfully, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep, and will not be able to set me free.’ She
found him sleeping heavily, and all her efforts to awaken him were of no
avail. Then she placed beside him a loaf, and some meat, and a flask
of wine, of such a kind, that however much he took of them, they would
never grow less. After that she drew a gold ring, on which her name was
engraved, off her finger, and put it upon one of his. Finally, she laid
a letter near him, in which, after giving him particulars of the food
and drink she had left for him, she finished with the following words:
‘I see that as long as you remain here you will never be able to set me
free; if, however, you still wish to do so, come to the golden castle
of Stromberg; this is well within your power to accomplish.’ She then
returned to her carriage and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.

When the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping, he was grieved
at heart, and said, ‘She has no doubt been here and driven away again,
and it is now too late for me to save her.’ Then his eyes fell on the
things which were lying beside him; he read the letter, and knew from it
all that had happened. He rose up without delay, eager to start on his
way and to reach the castle of Stromberg, but he had no idea in which
direction he ought to go. He travelled about a long time in search of it
and came at last to a dark forest, through which he went on walking for
fourteen days and still could not find a way out. Once more the night
came on, and worn out he lay down under a bush and fell asleep. Again
the next day he pursued his way through the forest, and that evening,
thinking to rest again, he lay down as before, but he heard such a
howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep. He waited till
it was darker and people had begun to light up their houses, and then
seeing a little glimmer ahead of him, he went towards it.

He found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than
it really was, from the contrast of its height with that of an immense
giant who stood in front of it. He thought to himself, ‘If the giant
sees me going in, my life will not be worth much.’ However, after a
while he summoned up courage and went forward. When the giant saw him,
he called out, ‘It is lucky for that you have come, for I have not had
anything to eat for a long time. I can have you now for my supper.’ ‘I
would rather you let that alone,’ said the man, ‘for I do not willingly
give myself up to be eaten; if you are wanting food I have enough to
satisfy your hunger.’ ‘If that is so,’ replied the giant, ‘I will leave
you in peace; I only thought of eating you because I had nothing else.’

So they went indoors together and sat down, and the man brought out the
bread, meat, and wine, which although he had eaten and drunk of them,
were still unconsumed. The giant was pleased with the good cheer, and
ate and drank to his heart’s content. When he had finished his supper
the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of Stromberg.
The giant said, ‘I will look on my map; on it are marked all the towns,
villages, and houses.’ So he fetched his map, and looked for the castle,
but could not find it. ‘Never mind,’ he said, ‘I have larger maps
upstairs in the cupboard, we will look on those,’ but they searched in
vain, for the castle was not marked even on these. The man now thought
he should like to continue his journey, but the giant begged him to
remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother, who was
away in search of provisions. When the brother came home, they asked him
about the castle of Stromberg, and he told them he would look on his own
maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger. Accordingly, when
he had finished his supper, they all went up together to his room and
looked through his maps, but the castle was not to be found. Then he
fetched other older maps, and they went on looking for the castle until
at last they found it, but it was many thousand miles away. ‘How shall I
be able to get there?’ asked the man. ‘I have two hours to spare,’ said
the giant, ‘and I will carry you into the neighbourhood of the castle; I
must then return to look after the child who is in our care.’

The giant, thereupon, carried the man to within about a hundred leagues
of the castle, where he left him, saying, ‘You will be able to walk the
remainder of the way yourself.’ The man journeyed on day and night
till he reached the golden castle of Stromberg. He found it situated,
however, on a glass mountain, and looking up from the foot he saw the
enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside. He was
overjoyed to see her, and longed to get to the top of the mountain, but
the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he
fell back again. When he saw that it was impossible to reach her, he was
greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘I will remain here and wait for
her,’ so he built himself a little hut, and there he sat and watched for
a whole year, and every day he saw the king’s daughter driving round her
castle, but still was unable to get nearer to her.

Looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he
called out to them, ‘God be with you.’ They stopped when they heard the
call, but looking round and seeing nobody, they went on again with their
fighting, which now became more furious. ‘God be with you,’ he cried
again, and again they paused and looked about, but seeing no one went
back to their fighting. A third time he called out, ‘God be with you,’
and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between
the three men, he went out and asked them why they were fighting so
angrily with one another. One of them said that he had found a stick,
and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he
wished to pass, and it immediately flew open. Another told him that he
had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible; and the third had
caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle, and even
up the glass mountain. They had been unable to decide whether they
would keep together and have the things in common, or whether they would
separate. On hearing this, the man said, ‘I will give you something in
exchange for those three things; not money, for that I have not got,
but something that is of far more value. I must first, however, prove
whether all you have told me about your three things is true.’ The
robbers, therefore, made him get on the horse, and handed him the stick
and the cloak, and when he had put this round him he was no longer
visible. Then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after
another, crying, ‘There, you idle vagabonds, you have got what you
deserve; are you satisfied now!’

After this he rode up the glass mountain. When he reached the gate of
the castle, he found it closed, but he gave it a blow with his stick,
and it flew wide open at once and he passed through. He mounted the
steps and entered the room where the maiden was sitting, with a golden
goblet full of wine in front of her. She could not see him for he still
wore his cloak. He took the ring which she had given him off his finger,
and threw it into the goblet, so that it rang as it touched the bottom.
‘That is my own ring,’ she exclaimed, ‘and if that is so the man must
also be here who is coming to set me free.’

She sought for him about the castle, but could find him nowhere.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off
the cloak. When therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him, and
cried aloud for joy. Then he dismounted and took her in his arms; and
she kissed him, and said, ‘Now you have indeed set me free, and tomorrow
we will celebrate our marriage.’




THE GOLDEN GOOSE

There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dummling,[*] and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.

It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,
and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a
bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.

When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade
him good day, and said: ‘Do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket,
and let me have a draught of your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ But
the clever son answered: ‘If I give you my cake and wine, I shall have
none for myself; be off with you,’ and he left the little man standing
and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made a
false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to go home
and have it bound up. And this was the little grey man’s doing.

After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave him,
like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The little old grey man
met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine.
But the second son, too, said sensibly enough: ‘What I give you will be
taken away from myself; be off!’ and he left the little man standing and
went on. His punishment, however, was not delayed; when he had made a
few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, so that he had to be
carried home.

Then Dummling said: ‘Father, do let me go and cut wood.’ The father
answered: ‘Your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,
you do not understand anything about it.’ But Dummling begged so long
that at last he said: ‘Just go then, you will get wiser by hurting
yourself.’ His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the
cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,
and greeting him, said: ‘Give me a piece of your cake and a drink out
of your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ Dummling answered: ‘I have
only cinder-cake and sour beer; if that pleases you, we will sit
down and eat.’ So they sat down, and when Dummling pulled out his
cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, and the sour beer had become good
wine. So they ate and drank, and after that the little man said: ‘Since
you have a good heart, and are willing to divide what you have, I will
give you good luck. There stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will
find something at the roots.’ Then the little man took leave of him.

Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a goose
sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her up, and
taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he would stay the
night. Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose and were
curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and would have
liked to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought: ‘I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather,’ and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by
the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others
screamed out: ‘Keep away; for goodness’ sake keep away!’ But she did
not understand why she was to keep away. ‘The others are there,’ she
thought, ‘I may as well be there too,’ and ran to them; but as soon as
she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her. So they
had to spend the night with the goose.

The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to
it. They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now right,
wherever his legs took him.

In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said: ‘For shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are you
running across the fields after this young man? Is that seemly?’ At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away,
but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and was himself
obliged to run behind.

Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson, running
behind three girls. He was astonished at this and called out: ‘Hi!
your reverence, whither away so quickly? Do not forget that we have a
christening today!’ and running after him he took him by the sleeve, but
was also held fast to it.

Whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two labourers
came with their hoes from the fields; the parson called out to them
and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. But they had
scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast, and now there were
seven of them running behind Dummling and the goose.

Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a daughter
who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. So he had put forth
a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry
her. When Dummling heard this, he went with his goose and all her train
before the king’s daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven people
running on and on, one behind the other, she began to laugh quite
loudly, and as if she would never stop. Thereupon Dummling asked to have
her for his wife; but the king did not like the son-in-law, and made all
manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink
a cellarful of wine. Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could
certainly help him; so he went into the forest, and in the same place
where he had felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very
sorrowful face. Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so
sorely, and he answered: ‘I have such a great thirst and cannot quench
it; cold water I cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but
that to me is like a drop on a hot stone!’

‘There, I can help you,’ said Dummling, ‘just come with me and you shall
be satisfied.’

He led him into the king’s cellar, and the man bent over the huge
barrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the day was
out he had emptied all the barrels. Then Dummling asked once more
for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom
everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he made a
new condition; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain
of bread. Dummling did not think long, but went straight into the
forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his
body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying: ‘I have eaten a
whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one has such a hunger
as I? My stomach remains empty, and I must tie myself up if I am not to
die of hunger.’

At this Dummling was glad, and said: ‘Get up and come with me; you shall
eat yourself full.’ He led him to the king’s palace where all the
flour in the whole Kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a huge
mountain of bread to be baked. The man from the forest stood before it,
began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished.
Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride; but the king again
sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on
water. ‘As soon as you come sailing back in it,’ said he, ‘you shall
have my daughter for wife.’

Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey
man to whom he had given his cake. When he heard what Dummling wanted,
he said: ‘Since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will give you
the ship; and I do all this because you once were kind to me.’ Then he
gave him the ship which could sail on land and water, and when the king
saw that, he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter. The
wedding was celebrated, and after the king’s death, Dummling inherited
his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife.

     [*] Simpleton




THE WATER OF LIFE

Long before you or I were born, there reigned, in a country a great way
off, a king who had three sons. This king once fell very ill--so ill
that nobody thought he could live. His sons were very much grieved
at their father’s sickness; and as they were walking together very
mournfully in the garden of the palace, a little old man met them and
asked what was the matter. They told him that their father was very ill,
and that they were afraid nothing could save him. ‘I know what would,’
said the little old man; ‘it is the Water of Life. If he could have a
draught of it he would be well again; but it is very hard to get.’ Then
the eldest son said, ‘I will soon find it’: and he went to the sick
king, and begged that he might go in search of the Water of Life, as
it was the only thing that could save him. ‘No,’ said the king. ‘I had
rather die than place you in such great danger as you must meet with in
your journey.’ But he begged so hard that the king let him go; and the
prince thought to himself, ‘If I bring my father this water, he will
make me sole heir to his kingdom.’

Then he set out: and when he had gone on his way some time he came to a
deep valley, overhung with rocks and woods; and as he looked around, he
saw standing above him on one of the rocks a little ugly dwarf, with a
sugarloaf cap and a scarlet cloak; and the dwarf called to him and said,
‘Prince, whither so fast?’ ‘What is that to thee, you ugly imp?’ said
the prince haughtily, and rode on.

But the dwarf was enraged at his behaviour, and laid a fairy spell
of ill-luck upon him; so that as he rode on the mountain pass became
narrower and narrower, and at last the way was so straitened that he
could not go to step forward: and when he thought to have turned his
horse round and go back the way he came, he heard a loud laugh ringing
round him, and found that the path was closed behind him, so that he was
shut in all round. He next tried to get off his horse and make his way
on foot, but again the laugh rang in his ears, and he found himself
unable to move a step, and thus he was forced to abide spellbound.

Meantime the old king was lingering on in daily hope of his son’s
return, till at last the second son said, ‘Father, I will go in search
of the Water of Life.’ For he thought to himself, ‘My brother is surely
dead, and the kingdom will fall to me if I find the water.’ The king was
at first very unwilling to let him go, but at last yielded to his wish.
So he set out and followed the same road which his brother had done,
and met with the same elf, who stopped him at the same spot in the
mountains, saying, as before, ‘Prince, prince, whither so fast?’ ‘Mind
your own affairs, busybody!’ said the prince scornfully, and rode on.

But the dwarf put the same spell upon him as he put on his elder
brother, and he, too, was at last obliged to take up his abode in the
heart of the mountains. Thus it is with proud silly people, who think
themselves above everyone else, and are too proud to ask or take advice.

When the second prince had thus been gone a long time, the youngest son
said he would go and search for the Water of Life, and trusted he should
soon be able to make his father well again. So he set out, and the dwarf
met him too at the same spot in the valley, among the mountains, and
said, ‘Prince, whither so fast?’ And the prince said, ‘I am going in
search of the Water of Life, because my father is ill, and like to die:
can you help me? Pray be kind, and aid me if you can!’ ‘Do you know
where it is to be found?’ asked the dwarf. ‘No,’ said the prince, ‘I do
not. Pray tell me if you know.’ ‘Then as you have spoken to me kindly,
and are wise enough to seek for advice, I will tell you how and where to
go. The water you seek springs from a well in an enchanted castle; and,
that you may be able to reach it in safety, I will give you an iron wand
and two little loaves of bread; strike the iron door of the castle three
times with the wand, and it will open: two hungry lions will be lying
down inside gaping for their prey, but if you throw them the bread they
will let you pass; then hasten on to the well, and take some of the
Water of Life before the clock strikes twelve; for if you tarry longer
the door will shut upon you for ever.’

Then the prince thanked his little friend with the scarlet cloak for his
friendly aid, and took the wand and the bread, and went travelling on
and on, over sea and over land, till he came to his journey’s end, and
found everything to be as the dwarf had told him. The door flew open at
the third stroke of the wand, and when the lions were quieted he went on
through the castle and came at length to a beautiful hall. Around it he
saw several knights sitting in a trance; then he pulled off their rings
and put them on his own fingers. In another room he saw on a table a
sword and a loaf of bread, which he also took. Further on he came to a
room where a beautiful young lady sat upon a couch; and she welcomed him
joyfully, and said, if he would set her free from the spell that bound
her, the kingdom should be his, if he would come back in a year and
marry her. Then she told him that the well that held the Water of Life
was in the palace gardens; and bade him make haste, and draw what he
wanted before the clock struck twelve.

He walked on; and as he walked through beautiful gardens he came to a
delightful shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himself,
as he felt tired, that he would rest himself for a while, and gaze on
the lovely scenes around him. So he laid himself down, and sleep
fell upon him unawares, so that he did not wake up till the clock was
striking a quarter to twelve. Then he sprang from the couch dreadfully
frightened, ran to the well, filled a cup that was standing by him full
of water, and hastened to get away in time. Just as he was going out of
the iron door it struck twelve, and the door fell so quickly upon him
that it snapped off a piece of his heel.

When he found himself safe, he was overjoyed to think that he had got
the Water of Life; and as he was going on his way homewards, he passed
by the little dwarf, who, when he saw the sword and the loaf, said, ‘You
have made a noble prize; with the sword you can at a blow slay whole
armies, and the bread will never fail you.’ Then the prince thought
to himself, ‘I cannot go home to my father without my brothers’; so he
said, ‘My dear friend, cannot you tell me where my two brothers are, who
set out in search of the Water of Life before me, and never came back?’
‘I have shut them up by a charm between two mountains,’ said the dwarf,
‘because they were proud and ill-behaved, and scorned to ask advice.’
The prince begged so hard for his brothers, that the dwarf at last set
them free, though unwillingly, saying, ‘Beware of them, for they have
bad hearts.’ Their brother, however, was greatly rejoiced to see them,
and told them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water
of Life, and had taken a cup full of it; and how he had set a beautiful
princess free from a spell that bound her; and how she had engaged to
wait a whole year, and then to marry him, and to give him the kingdom.

Then they all three rode on together, and on their way home came to a
country that was laid waste by war and a dreadful famine, so that it was
feared all must die for want. But the prince gave the king of the land
the bread, and all his kingdom ate of it. And he lent the king the
wonderful sword, and he slew the enemy’s army with it; and thus the
kingdom was once more in peace and plenty. In the same manner he
befriended two other countries through which they passed on their way.

When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and during their voyage
the two eldest said to themselves, ‘Our brother has got the water which
we could not find, therefore our father will forsake us and give him the
kingdom, which is our right’; so they were full of envy and revenge, and
agreed together how they could ruin him. Then they waited till he was
fast asleep, and poured the Water of Life out of the cup, and took it
for themselves, giving him bitter sea-water instead.

When they came to their journey’s end, the youngest son brought his cup
to the sick king, that he might drink and be healed. Scarcely, however,
had he tasted the bitter sea-water when he became worse even than he was
before; and then both the elder sons came in, and blamed the youngest
for what they had done; and said that he wanted to poison their father,
but that they had found the Water of Life, and had brought it with them.
He no sooner began to drink of what they brought him, than he felt his
sickness leave him, and was as strong and well as in his younger days.
Then they went to their brother, and laughed at him, and said, ‘Well,
brother, you found the Water of Life, did you? You have had the trouble
and we shall have the reward. Pray, with all your cleverness, why did
not you manage to keep your eyes open? Next year one of us will take
away your beautiful princess, if you do not take care. You had better
say nothing about this to our father, for he does not believe a word you
say; and if you tell tales, you shall lose your life into the bargain:
but be quiet, and we will let you off.’

The old king was still very angry with his youngest son, and thought
that he really meant to have taken away his life; so he called his court
together, and asked what should be done, and all agreed that he ought to
be put to death. The prince knew nothing of what was going on, till one
day, when the king’s chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they
were alone in the wood together, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that
the prince said, ‘My friend, what is the matter with you?’ ‘I cannot and
dare not tell you,’ said he. But the prince begged very hard, and said,
‘Only tell me what it is, and do not think I shall be angry, for I will
forgive you.’ ‘Alas!’ said the huntsman; ‘the king has ordered me to
shoot you.’ The prince started at this, and said, ‘Let me live, and I
will change dresses with you; you shall take my royal coat to show to my
father, and do you give me your shabby one.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
the huntsman; ‘I am sure I shall be glad to save you, for I could not
have shot you.’ Then he took the prince’s coat, and gave him the shabby
one, and went away through the wood.

Some time after, three grand embassies came to the old king’s court,
with rich gifts of gold and precious stones for his youngest son; now
all these were sent from the three kings to whom he had lent his sword
and loaf of bread, in order to rid them of their enemy and feed their
people. This touched the old king’s heart, and he thought his son might
still be guiltless, and said to his court, ‘O that my son were still
alive! how it grieves me that I had him killed!’ ‘He is still alive,’
said the huntsman; ‘and I am glad that I had pity on him, but let him
go in peace, and brought home his royal coat.’ At this the king was
overwhelmed with joy, and made it known throughout all his kingdom, that
if his son would come back to his court he would forgive him.

Meanwhile the princess was eagerly waiting till her deliverer should
come back; and had a road made leading up to her palace all of shining
gold; and told her courtiers that whoever came on horseback, and rode
straight up to the gate upon it, was her true lover; and that they must
let him in: but whoever rode on one side of it, they must be sure was
not the right one; and that they must send him away at once.

The time soon came, when the eldest brother thought that he would make
haste to go to the princess, and say that he was the one who had set
her free, and that he should have her for his wife, and the kingdom with
her. As he came before the palace and saw the golden road, he stopped to
look at it, and he thought to himself, ‘It is a pity to ride upon this
beautiful road’; so he turned aside and rode on the right-hand side of
it. But when he came to the gate, the guards, who had seen the road
he took, said to him, he could not be what he said he was, and must go
about his business.

The second prince set out soon afterwards on the same errand; and when
he came to the golden road, and his horse had set one foot upon it,
he stopped to look at it, and thought it very beautiful, and said to
himself, ‘What a pity it is that anything should tread here!’ Then he
too turned aside and rode on the left side of it. But when he came to
the gate the guards said he was not the true prince, and that he too
must go away about his business; and away he went.

Now when the full year was come round, the third brother left the forest
in which he had lain hid for fear of his father’s anger, and set out in
search of his betrothed bride. So he journeyed on, thinking of her all
the way, and rode so quickly that he did not even see what the road was
made of, but went with his horse straight over it; and as he came to the
gate it flew open, and the princess welcomed him with joy, and said
he was her deliverer, and should now be her husband and lord of the
kingdom. When the first joy at their meeting was over, the princess told
him she had heard of his father having forgiven him, and of his wish to
have him home again: so, before his wedding with the princess, he went
to visit his father, taking her with him. Then he told him everything;
how his brothers had cheated and robbed him, and yet that he had borne
all those wrongs for the love of his father. And the old king was very
angry, and wanted to punish his wicked sons; but they made their escape,
and got into a ship and sailed away over the wide sea, and where they
went to nobody knew and nobody cared.

And now the old king gathered together his court, and asked all his
kingdom to come and celebrate the wedding of his son and the princess.
And young and old, noble and squire, gentle and simple, came at once
on the summons; and among the rest came the friendly dwarf, with the
sugarloaf hat, and a new scarlet cloak.

  And the wedding was held, and the merry bells run.
  And all the good people they danced and they sung,
  And feasted and frolick’d I can’t tell how long.




THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN

There was once a king’s son who had a bride whom he loved very much. And
when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that his father
lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again before his end.
Then he said to his beloved: ‘I must now go and leave you, I give you
a ring as a remembrance of me. When I am king, I will return and fetch
you.’ So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was
dangerously ill, and near his death. He said to him: ‘Dear son, I wished
to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I wish,’ and
he named a certain king’s daughter who was to be his wife. The son was
in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing, and said: ‘Yes,
dear father, your will shall be done,’ and thereupon the king shut his
eyes, and died.

When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of
mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had given
his father, and caused the king’s daughter to be asked in marriage, and
she was promised to him. His first betrothed heard of this, and fretted
so much about his faithfulness that she nearly died. Then her father
said to her: ‘Dearest child, why are you so sad? You shall have
whatsoever you will.’ She thought for a moment and said: ‘Dear father,
I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face, figure, and size.’
The father said: ‘If it be possible, your desire shall be fulfilled,’
and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom, until eleven
young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face,
figure, and size.

When they came to the king’s daughter, she had twelve suits of
huntsmen’s clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen’s clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took her leave of her father, and rode away with them,
and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all of
them into his service. The king looked at her and did not know her, but
as they were such handsome fellows, he said: ‘Yes,’ and that he would
willingly take them, and now they were the king’s twelve huntsmen.

The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew
all concealed and secret things. It came to pass that one evening he
said to the king: ‘You think you have twelve huntsmen?’ ‘Yes,’ said the
king, ‘they are twelve huntsmen.’ The lion continued: ‘You are mistaken,
they are twelve girls.’ The king said: ‘That cannot be true! How
will you prove that to me?’ ‘Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the
ante-chamber,’ answered the lion, ‘and then you will soon see. Men have
a firm step, and when they walk over peas none of them stir, but girls
trip and skip, and drag their feet, and the peas roll about.’ The king
was well pleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.

There was, however, a servant of the king’s who favoured the huntsmen,
and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went to
them and repeated everything, and said: ‘The lion wants to make the king
believe that you are girls.’ Then the king’s daughter thanked him, and
said to her maidens: ‘Show some strength, and step firmly on the peas.’
So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen called before
him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peas were lying, they
stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong, sure walk, that not
one of the peas either rolled or stirred. Then they went away again,
and the king said to the lion: ‘You have lied to me, they walk just like
men.’ The lion said: ‘They have been informed that they were going to
be put to the test, and have assumed some strength. Just let twelve
spinning-wheels be brought into the ante-chamber, and they will go to
them and be pleased with them, and that is what no man would do.’
The king liked the advice, and had the spinning-wheels placed in the
ante-chamber.

But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and disclosed the project. So when they were alone the king’s daughter
said to her eleven girls: ‘Show some constraint, and do not look round
at the spinning-wheels.’ And next morning when the king had his twelve
huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber, and never once
looked at the spinning-wheels. Then the king again said to the lion:
‘You have deceived me, they are men, for they have not looked at the
spinning-wheels.’ The lion replied: ‘They have restrained themselves.’
The king, however, would no longer believe the lion.

The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his
liking for them continually increased. Now it came to pass that
once when they were out hunting, news came that the king’s bride was
approaching. When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much that
her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the ground. The
king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman, ran up to him,
wanted to help him, and drew his glove off. Then he saw the ring which
he had given to his first bride, and when he looked in her face he
recognized her. Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and
when she opened her eyes he said: ‘You are mine, and I am yours, and
no one in the world can alter that.’ He sent a messenger to the other
bride, and entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife
already, and someone who had just found an old key did not require a new
one. Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken
into favour, because, after all, he had told the truth.




THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN

There was once a merchant who had only one child, a son, that was very
young, and barely able to run alone. He had two richly laden ships then
making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embarked all his wealth,
in the hope of making great gains, when the news came that both were
lost. Thus from being a rich man he became all at once so very poor that
nothing was left to him but one small plot of land; and there he often
went in an evening to take his walk, and ease his mind of a little of
his trouble.

One day, as he was roaming along in a brown study, thinking with no
great comfort on what he had been and what he now was, and was like
to be, all on a sudden there stood before him a little, rough-looking,
black dwarf. ‘Prithee, friend, why so sorrowful?’ said he to the
merchant; ‘what is it you take so deeply to heart?’ ‘If you would do me
any good I would willingly tell you,’ said the merchant. ‘Who knows but
I may?’ said the little man: ‘tell me what ails you, and perhaps you
will find I may be of some use.’ Then the merchant told him how all his
wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nothing left
but that little plot of land. ‘Oh, trouble not yourself about that,’
said the dwarf; ‘only undertake to bring me here, twelve years hence,
whatever meets you first on your going home, and I will give you as much
as you please.’ The merchant thought this was no great thing to ask;
that it would most likely be his dog or his cat, or something of that
sort, but forgot his little boy Heinel; so he agreed to the bargain, and
signed and sealed the bond to do what was asked of him.

But as he drew near home, his little boy was so glad to see him that he
crept behind him, and laid fast hold of his legs, and looked up in
his face and laughed. Then the father started, trembling with fear and
horror, and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do; but as no
gold was come, he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke
that the dwarf was playing him, and that, at any rate, when the money
came, he should see the bearer, and would not take it in.

About a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look
for some old iron, that he might sell it and raise a little money; and
there, instead of his iron, he saw a large pile of gold lying on the
floor. At the sight of this he was overjoyed, and forgetting all about
his son, went into trade again, and became a richer merchant than
before.

Meantime little Heinel grew up, and as the end of the twelve years drew
near the merchant began to call to mind his bond, and became very sad
and thoughtful; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face. The
boy one day asked what was the matter, but his father would not tell for
some time; at last, however, he said that he had, without knowing it,
sold him for gold to a little, ugly-looking, black dwarf, and that the
twelve years were coming round when he must keep his word. Then Heinel
said, ‘Father, give yourself very little trouble about that; I shall be
too much for the little man.’

When the time came, the father and son went out together to the place
agreed upon: and the son drew a circle on the ground, and set himself
and his father in the middle of it. The little black dwarf soon came,
and walked round and round about the circle, but could not find any way
to get into it, and he either could not, or dared not, jump over it. At
last the boy said to him. ‘Have you anything to say to us, my friend, or
what do you want?’ Now Heinel had found a friend in a good fairy, that
was fond of him, and had told him what to do; for this fairy knew what
good luck was in store for him. ‘Have you brought me what you said you
would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant. The old man held his tongue, but
Heinel said again, ‘What do you want here?’ The dwarf said, ‘I come to
talk with your father, not with you.’ ‘You have cheated and taken in my
father,’ said the son; ‘pray give him up his bond at once.’ ‘Fair and
softly,’ said the little old man; ‘right is right; I have paid my money,
and your father has had it, and spent it; so be so good as to let me
have what I paid it for.’ ‘You must have my consent to that first,’ said
Heinel, ‘so please to step in here, and let us talk it over.’ The old
man grinned, and showed his teeth, as if he should have been very glad
to get into the circle if he could. Then at last, after a long talk,
they came to terms. Heinel agreed that his father must give him up, and
that so far the dwarf should have his way: but, on the other hand, the
fairy had told Heinel what fortune was in store for him, if he followed
his own course; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed
friend, who seemed so anxious for his company.

So, to make a sort of drawn battle of the matter, it was settled that
Heinel should be put into an open boat, that lay on the sea-shore hard
by; that the father should push him off with his own hand, and that he
should thus be set adrift, and left to the bad or good luck of wind and
weather. Then he took leave of his father, and set himself in the boat,
but before it got far off a wave struck it, and it fell with one side
low in the water, so the merchant thought that poor Heinel was lost, and
went home very sorrowful, while the dwarf went his way, thinking that at
any rate he had had his revenge.

The boat, however, did not sink, for the good fairy took care of her
friend, and soon raised the boat up again, and it went safely on. The
young man sat safe within, till at length it ran ashore upon an unknown
land. As he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle
but empty and dreary within, for it was enchanted. ‘Here,’ said he to
himself, ‘must I find the prize the good fairy told me of.’ So he once
more searched the whole palace through, till at last he found a white
snake, lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers.

Now the white snake was an enchanted princess; and she was very glad
to see him, and said, ‘Are you at last come to set me free? Twelve
long years have I waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she
promised, for you alone can save me. This night twelve men will come:
their faces will be black, and they will be dressed in chain armour.
They will ask what you do here, but give no answer; and let them do
what they will--beat, whip, pinch, prick, or torment you--bear all; only
speak not a word, and at twelve o’clock they must go away. The second
night twelve others will come: and the third night twenty-four, who
will even cut off your head; but at the twelfth hour of that night their
power is gone, and I shall be free, and will come and bring you the
Water of Life, and will wash you with it, and bring you back to life
and health.’ And all came to pass as she had said; Heinel bore all, and
spoke not a word; and the third night the princess came, and fell on his
neck and kissed him. Joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle,
the wedding was celebrated, and he was crowned king of the Golden
Mountain.

They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son. And thus
eight years had passed over their heads, when the king thought of his
father; and he began to long to see him once again. But the queen was
against his going, and said, ‘I know well that misfortunes will come
upon us if you go.’ However, he gave her no rest till she agreed. At his
going away she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, ‘Take this ring, and
put it on your finger; whatever you wish it will bring you; only promise
never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father’s house.’ Then
he said he would do what she asked, and put the ring on his finger, and
wished himself near the town where his father lived.

Heinel found himself at the gates in a moment; but the guards would
not let him go in, because he was so strangely clad. So he went up to a
neighbouring hill, where a shepherd dwelt, and borrowed his old frock,
and thus passed unknown into the town. When he came to his father’s
house, he said he was his son; but the merchant would not believe him,
and said he had had but one son, his poor Heinel, who he knew was long
since dead: and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd, he would
not even give him anything to eat. The king, however, still vowed that
he was his son, and said, ‘Is there no mark by which you would know me
if I am really your son?’ ‘Yes,’ said his mother, ‘our Heinel had a mark
like a raspberry on his right arm.’ Then he showed them the mark, and
they knew that what he had said was true.

He next told them how he was king of the Golden Mountain, and was
married to a princess, and had a son seven years old. But the merchant
said, ‘that can never be true; he must be a fine king truly who travels
about in a shepherd’s frock!’ At this the son was vexed; and forgetting
his word, turned his ring, and wished for his queen and son. In an
instant they stood before him; but the queen wept, and said he had
broken his word, and bad luck would follow. He did all he could to
soothe her, and she at last seemed to be appeased; but she was not so in
truth, and was only thinking how she should punish him.

One day he took her to walk with him out of the town, and showed her
the spot where the boat was set adrift upon the wide waters. Then he sat
himself down, and said, ‘I am very much tired; sit by me, I will rest my
head in your lap, and sleep a while.’ As soon as he had fallen asleep,
however, she drew the ring from his finger, and crept softly away, and
wished herself and her son at home in their kingdom. And when he awoke
he found himself alone, and saw that the ring was gone from his finger.
‘I can never go back to my father’s house,’ said he; ‘they would say I
am a sorcerer: I will journey forth into the world, till I come again to
my kingdom.’

So saying he set out and travelled till he came to a hill, where three
giants were sharing their father’s goods; and as they saw him pass they
cried out and said, ‘Little men have sharp wits; he shall part the goods
between us.’ Now there was a sword that cut off an enemy’s head whenever
the wearer gave the words, ‘Heads off!’; a cloak that made the owner
invisible, or gave him any form he pleased; and a pair of boots that
carried the wearer wherever he wished. Heinel said they must first let
him try these wonderful things, then he might know how to set a value
upon them. Then they gave him the cloak, and he wished himself a fly,
and in a moment he was a fly. ‘The cloak is very well,’ said he: ‘now
give me the sword.’ ‘No,’ said they; ‘not unless you undertake not to
say, “Heads off!” for if you do we are all dead men.’ So they gave it
him, charging him to try it on a tree. He next asked for the boots also;
and the moment he had all three in his power, he wished himself at
the Golden Mountain; and there he was at once. So the giants were left
behind with no goods to share or quarrel about.

As Heinel came near his castle he heard the sound of merry music; and
the people around told him that his queen was about to marry another
husband. Then he threw his cloak around him, and passed through the
castle hall, and placed himself by the side of the queen, where no one
saw him. But when anything to eat was put upon her plate, he took it
away and ate it himself; and when a glass of wine was handed to her, he
took it and drank it; and thus, though they kept on giving her meat and
drink, her plate and cup were always empty.

Upon this, fear and remorse came over her, and she went into her chamber
alone, and sat there weeping; and he followed her there. ‘Alas!’ said
she to herself, ‘was I not once set free? Why then does this enchantment
still seem to bind me?’

‘False and fickle one!’ said he. ‘One indeed came who set thee free, and
he is now near thee again; but how have you used him? Ought he to
have had such treatment from thee?’ Then he went out and sent away the
company, and said the wedding was at an end, for that he was come back
to the kingdom. But the princes, peers, and great men mocked at him.
However, he would enter into no parley with them, but only asked them
if they would go in peace or not. Then they turned upon him and tried
to seize him; but he drew his sword. ‘Heads Off!’ cried he; and with the
word the traitors’ heads fell before him, and Heinel was once more king
of the Golden Mountain.




DOCTOR KNOWALL

There was once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with
two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor for two
talers. When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that
the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how well he
ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and would willingly
have been a doctor too. So he remained standing a while, and at length
inquired if he too could not be a doctor. ‘Oh, yes,’ said the doctor,
‘that is soon managed.’ ‘What must I do?’ asked the peasant. ‘In the
first place buy yourself an A B C book of the kind which has a cock on
the frontispiece; in the second, turn your cart and your two oxen into
money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to
medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself with the words: “I
am Doctor Knowall,” and have that nailed up above your house-door.’ The
peasant did everything that he had been told to do. When he had doctored
people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money
stolen. Then he was told about Doctor Knowall who lived in such and such
a village, and must know what had become of the money. So the lord had
the horses harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and
asked Crabb if he were Doctor Knowall. Yes, he was, he said. Then he was
to go with him and bring back the stolen money. ‘Oh, yes, but Grete, my
wife, must go too.’ The lord was willing, and let both of them have a
seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together. When they came
to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and Crabb was told to
sit down and eat. ‘Yes, but my wife, Grete, too,’ said he, and he seated
himself with her at the table. And when the first servant came with a
dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said: ‘Grete,
that was the first,’ meaning that was the servant who brought the first
dish. The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say: ‘That is
the first thief,’ and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said
to his comrade outside: ‘The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he
said I was the first.’ The second did not want to go in at all, but was
forced. So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife,
and said: ‘Grete, that is the second.’ This servant was equally alarmed,
and he got out as fast as he could. The third fared no better, for the
peasant again said: ‘Grete, that is the third.’ The fourth had to carry
in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor that he was to
show his skill, and guess what was beneath the cover. Actually, there
were crabs. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and
cried: ‘Ah, poor Crabb.’ When the lord heard that, he cried: ‘There! he
knows it; he must also know who has the money!’

On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the
doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment. When therefore
he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen
the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a
heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he
did they would be hanged. They led him to the spot where the money was
concealed. With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall,
sat down to the table, and said: ‘My lord, now will I search in my book
where the gold is hidden.’ The fifth servant, however, crept into the
stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. But the doctor sat still
and opened his A B C book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and
looked for the cock. As he could not find it immediately he said: ‘I
know you are there, so you had better come out!’ Then the fellow in the
stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out,
crying: ‘That man knows everything!’ Then Doctor Knowall showed the lord
where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received
from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.




THE SEVEN RAVENS

There was once a man who had seven sons, and last of all one daughter.
Although the little girl was very pretty, she was so weak and small that
they thought she could not live; but they said she should at once be
christened.

So the father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to get some
water, but the other six ran with him. Each wanted to be first at
drawing the water, and so they were in such a hurry that all let their
pitchers fall into the well, and they stood very foolishly looking at
one another, and did not know what to do, for none dared go home. In the
meantime the father was uneasy, and could not tell what made the
young men stay so long. ‘Surely,’ said he, ‘the whole seven must have
forgotten themselves over some game of play’; and when he had waited
still longer and they yet did not come, he flew into a rage and wished
them all turned into ravens. Scarcely had he spoken these words when he
heard a croaking over his head, and looked up and saw seven ravens as
black as coal flying round and round. Sorry as he was to see his wish
so fulfilled, he did not know how what was done could be undone, and
comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons
with his dear little daughter, who soon became stronger and every day
more beautiful.

For a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers; for
her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her: but one
day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them. ‘Yes,’ said
they, ‘she is beautiful indeed, but still ‘tis a pity that her brothers
should have been lost for her sake.’ Then she was much grieved, and went
to her father and mother, and asked if she had any brothers, and what
had become of them. So they dared no longer hide the truth from her, but
said it was the will of Heaven, and that her birth was only the innocent
cause of it; but the little girl mourned sadly about it every day, and
thought herself bound to do all she could to bring her brothers back;
and she had neither rest nor ease, till at length one day she stole
away, and set out into the wide world to find her brothers, wherever
they might be, and free them, whatever it might cost her.

She took nothing with her but a little ring which her father and mother
had given her, a loaf of bread in case she should be hungry, a little
pitcher of water in case she should be thirsty, and a little stool
to rest upon when she should be weary. Thus she went on and on, and
journeyed till she came to the world’s end; then she came to the sun,
but the sun looked much too hot and fiery; so she ran away quickly to
the moon, but the moon was cold and chilly, and said, ‘I smell flesh
and blood this way!’ so she took herself away in a hurry and came to the
stars, and the stars were friendly and kind to her, and each star sat
upon his own little stool; but the morning star rose up and gave her a
little piece of wood, and said, ‘If you have not this little piece of
wood, you cannot unlock the castle that stands on the glass-mountain,
and there your brothers live.’ The little girl took the piece of wood,
rolled it up in a little cloth, and went on again until she came to the
glass-mountain, and found the door shut. Then she felt for the little
piece of wood; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there, and
she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars. What was to be done?
She wanted to save her brothers, and had no key of the castle of the
glass-mountain; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her
pocket and cut off her little finger, that was just the size of the
piece of wood she had lost, and put it in the door and opened it.

As she went in, a little dwarf came up to her, and said, ‘What are you
seeking for?’ ‘I seek for my brothers, the seven ravens,’ answered she.
Then the dwarf said, ‘My masters are not at home; but if you will wait
till they come, pray step in.’ Now the little dwarf was getting their
dinner ready, and he brought their food upon seven little plates, and
their drink in seven little glasses, and set them upon the table, and
out of each little plate their sister ate a small piece, and out of each
little glass she drank a small drop; but she let the ring that she had
brought with her fall into the last glass.

On a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air, and the
dwarf said, ‘Here come my masters.’ When they came in, they wanted to
eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. Then said
one after the other,

‘Who has eaten from my little plate? And who has been drinking out of my
little glass?’

 ‘Caw! Caw! well I ween
  Mortal lips have this way been.’

When the seventh came to the bottom of his glass, and found there the
ring, he looked at it, and knew that it was his father’s and mother’s,
and said, ‘O that our little sister would but come! then we should be
free.’ When the little girl heard this (for she stood behind the door
all the time and listened), she ran forward, and in an instant all
the ravens took their right form again; and all hugged and kissed each
other, and went merrily home.




THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX


FIRST STORY

There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that
his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to put her to the test. He
stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved
as if he were stone dead. Mrs Fox went up to her room, shut herself in,
and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking. When it
became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking. She went
and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said:

 ‘What may you be about, Miss Cat?
  Do you sleep or do you wake?’

She answered:

 ‘I am not sleeping, I am waking,
  Would you know what I am making?
  I am boiling warm beer with butter,
  Will you be my guest for supper?’

‘No, thank you, miss,’ said the fox, ‘what is Mrs Fox doing?’ The maid
replied:

 ‘She is sitting in her room,
  Moaning in her gloom,
  Weeping her little eyes quite red,
  Because old Mr Fox is dead.’

‘Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like to woo
her.’ ‘Certainly, young sir.’

  The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,
  The door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,
 ‘Mistress Fox, are you inside?’
 ‘Oh, yes, my little cat,’ she cried.
 ‘A wooer he stands at the door out there.’
 ‘What does he look like, my dear?’

‘Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late Mr Fox?’ ‘Oh, no,’ answered
the cat, ‘he has only one.’ ‘Then I will not have him.’

Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away. Soon afterwards there
was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo Mrs
Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first. After
this still more came, each with one tail more than the other, but they
were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like
old Mr Fox. When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat:

 ‘Now open the gates and doors all wide,
  And carry old Mr Fox outside.’

But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old Mr Fox stirred
under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and Mrs
Fox out of the house.


SECOND STORY

When old Mr Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knocked at the
door, and the cat who was servant to Mrs Fox, opened it for him. The
wolf greeted her, and said:

 ‘Good day, Mrs Cat of Kehrewit,
  How comes it that alone you sit?
  What are you making good?’

The cat replied:

 ‘In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet,
  Will you be my guest, and eat?’

‘No, thank you, Mrs Cat,’ answered the wolf. ‘Is Mrs Fox not at home?’

The cat said:

 ‘She sits upstairs in her room,
  Bewailing her sorrowful doom,
  Bewailing her trouble so sore,
  For old Mr Fox is no more.’

The wolf answered:

 ‘If she’s in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please her to step below?’
  The cat runs quickly up the stair,
  And lets her tail fly here and there,
  Until she comes to the parlour door.
  With her five gold rings at the door she knocks:
 ‘Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
  If you’re in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please you to step below?

Mrs Fox asked: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a pointed
mouth?’ ‘No,’ answered the cat. ‘Then he won’t do for me.’

When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and
all the beasts of the forest, one after the other. But one of the good
qualities which old Mr Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the
cat had continually to send the suitors away. At length came a young
fox. Then Mrs Fox said: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has a
little pointed mouth?’ ‘Yes,’ said the cat, ‘he has.’ ‘Then let him come
upstairs,’ said Mrs Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding
feast.

 ‘Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
  Up with the window, fling out my old man!
  For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
  Yet of his wife he never thought,
  But ate up every one he caught.’

Then the wedding was solemnized with young Mr Fox, and there was much
rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing
still.




THE SALAD

As a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood,
there came up a little old woman, and said to him, ‘Good day, good day;
you seem merry enough, but I am hungry and thirsty; do pray give me
something to eat.’ The huntsman took pity on her, and put his hand in
his pocket and gave her what he had. Then he wanted to go his way; but
she took hold of him, and said, ‘Listen, my friend, to what I am going
to tell you; I will reward you for your kindness; go your way, and after
a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds
sitting on a cloak. Shoot into the midst of them, and one will fall down
dead: the cloak will fall too; take it, it is a wishing-cloak, and when
you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to
be. Cut open the dead bird, take out its heart and keep it, and you will
find a piece of gold under your pillow every morning when you rise. It
is the bird’s heart that will bring you this good luck.’

The huntsman thanked her, and thought to himself, ‘If all this does
happen, it will be a fine thing for me.’ When he had gone a hundred
steps or so, he heard a screaming and chirping in the branches over him,
and looked up and saw a flock of birds pulling a cloak with their bills
and feet; screaming, fighting, and tugging at each other as if
each wished to have it himself. ‘Well,’ said the huntsman, ‘this is
wonderful; this happens just as the old woman said’; then he shot into
the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about. Off went the
flock chattering away; but one fell down dead, and the cloak with it.
Then the huntsman did as the old woman told him, cut open the bird, took
out the heart, and carried the cloak home with him.

The next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow, and there lay
the piece of gold glittering underneath; the same happened next day, and
indeed every day when he arose. He heaped up a great deal of gold, and
at last thought to himself, ‘Of what use is this gold to me whilst I am
at home? I will go out into the world and look about me.’

Then he took leave of his friends, and hung his bag and bow about his
neck, and went his way. It so happened that his road one day led through
a thick wood, at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow,
and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young
lady by her side looking about them. Now the old woman was a witch, and
said to the young lady, ‘There is a young man coming out of the wood who
carries a wonderful prize; we must get it away from him, my dear child,
for it is more fit for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart that
brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning.’ Meantime the
huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady, and said to himself, ‘I
have been travelling so long that I should like to go into this castle
and rest myself, for I have money enough to pay for anything I want’;
but the real reason was, that he wanted to see more of the beautiful
lady. Then he went into the house, and was welcomed kindly; and it was
not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else
but looking at the lady’s eyes, and doing everything that she wished.
Then the old woman said, ‘Now is the time for getting the bird’s heart.’
So the lady stole it away, and he never found any more gold under his
pillow, for it lay now under the young lady’s, and the old woman took it
away every morning; but he was so much in love that he never missed his
prize.

‘Well,’ said the old witch, ‘we have got the bird’s heart, but not the
wishing-cloak yet, and that we must also get.’ ‘Let us leave him that,’
said the young lady; ‘he has already lost his wealth.’ Then the witch
was very angry, and said, ‘Such a cloak is a very rare and wonderful
thing, and I must and will have it.’ So she did as the old woman told
her, and set herself at the window, and looked about the country and
seemed very sorrowful; then the huntsman said, ‘What makes you so sad?’
‘Alas! dear sir,’ said she, ‘yonder lies the granite rock where all the
costly diamonds grow, and I want so much to go there, that whenever I
think of it I cannot help being sorrowful, for who can reach it? only
the birds and the flies--man cannot.’ ‘If that’s all your grief,’ said
the huntsman, ‘I’ll take you there with all my heart’; so he drew her under
his cloak, and the moment he wished to be on the granite mountain they
were both there. The diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were
delighted with the sight and picked up the finest. But the old witch
made a deep sleep come upon him, and he said to the young lady, ‘Let us
sit down and rest ourselves a little, I am so tired that I cannot stand
any longer.’ So they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and
fell asleep; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from
his shoulders, hung it on her own, picked up the diamonds, and wished
herself home again.

When he awoke and found that his lady had tricked him, and left him
alone on the wild rock, he said, ‘Alas! what roguery there is in the
world!’ and there he sat in great grief and fear, not knowing what to
do. Now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it; and as
he saw three of them striding about, he thought to himself, ‘I can only
save myself by feigning to be asleep’; so he laid himself down as if he
were in a sound sleep. When the giants came up to him, the first pushed
him with his foot, and said, ‘What worm is this that lies here curled
up?’ ‘Tread upon him and kill him,’ said the second. ‘It’s not worth the
trouble,’ said the third; ‘let him live, he’ll go climbing higher up the
mountain, and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away.’ And they
passed on. But the huntsman had heard all they said; and as soon as they
were gone, he climbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat
there a short time a cloud came rolling around him, and caught him in a
whirlwind and bore him along for some time, till it settled in a garden,
and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages.

Then he looked around him, and said, ‘I wish I had something to eat, if
not I shall be worse off than before; for here I see neither apples
nor pears, nor any kind of fruits, nothing but vegetables.’ At last he
thought to himself, ‘I can eat salad, it will refresh and strengthen
me.’ So he picked out a fine head and ate of it; but scarcely had he
swallowed two bites when he felt himself quite changed, and saw with
horror that he was turned into an ass. However, he still felt very
hungry, and the salad tasted very nice; so he ate on till he came
to another kind of salad, and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt
another change come over him, and soon saw that he was lucky enough to
have found his old shape again.

Then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness; and
when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and
the bad salad, and thought to himself, ‘This will help me to my fortune
again, and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery.’ So he
went away to try and find the castle of his friends; and after wandering
about a few days he luckily found it. Then he stained his face all over
brown, so that even his mother would not have known him, and went into
the castle and asked for a lodging; ‘I am so tired,’ said he, ‘that I
can go no farther.’ ‘Countryman,’ said the witch, ‘who are you? and what
is your business?’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘a messenger sent by the king to
find the finest salad that grows under the sun. I have been lucky
enough to find it, and have brought it with me; but the heat of the sun
scorches so that it begins to wither, and I don’t know that I can carry
it farther.’

When the witch and the young lady heard of his beautiful salad, they
longed to taste it, and said, ‘Dear countryman, let us just taste it.’
‘To be sure,’ answered he; ‘I have two heads of it with me, and will
give you one’; so he opened his bag and gave them the bad. Then the
witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed; and when it was
ready she could not wait till it was carried up, but took a few leaves
immediately and put them in her mouth, and scarcely were they swallowed
when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the
form of an ass. Now the servant-maid came into the kitchen, and seeing
the salad ready, was going to carry it up; but on the way she too felt a
wish to taste it as the old woman had done, and ate some leaves; so she
also was turned into an ass and ran after the other, letting the dish
with the salad fall on the ground. The messenger sat all this time with
the beautiful young lady, and as nobody came with the salad and she
longed to taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad can be.’
Then he thought something must have happened, and said, ‘I will go
into the kitchen and see.’ And as he went he saw two asses in the court
running about, and the salad lying on the ground. ‘All right!’ said
he; ‘those two have had their share.’ Then he took up the rest of
the leaves, laid them on the dish and brought them to the young lady,
saying, ‘I bring you the dish myself that you may not wait any longer.’
So she ate of it, and like the others ran off into the court braying
away.

Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they
might know him. ‘Now you shall be paid for your roguery,’ said he; and
tied them all three to a rope and took them along with him till he
came to a mill and knocked at the window. ‘What’s the matter?’ said the
miller. ‘I have three tiresome beasts here,’ said the other; ‘if you
will take them, give them food and room, and treat them as I tell you,
I will pay you whatever you ask.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said the miller;
‘but how shall I treat them?’ Then the huntsman said, ‘Give the old
one stripes three times a day and hay once; give the next (who was
the servant-maid) stripes once a day and hay three times; and give
the youngest (who was the beautiful lady) hay three times a day and
no stripes’: for he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he
wanted.

Some days after, the miller came to him and told him that the old ass
was dead; ‘The other two,’ said he, ‘are alive and eat, but are so
sorrowful that they cannot last long.’ Then the huntsman pitied them,
and told the miller to drive them back to him, and when they came, he
gave them some of the good salad to eat. And the beautiful young lady
fell upon her knees before him, and said, ‘O dearest huntsman! forgive
me all the ill I have done you; my mother forced me to it, it was
against my will, for I always loved you very much. Your wishing-cloak
hangs up in the closet, and as for the bird’s heart, I will give it you
too.’ But he said, ‘Keep it, it will be just the same thing, for I mean
to make you my wife.’ So they were married, and lived together very
happily till they died.




THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS

A certain father had two sons, the elder of who was smart and sensible,
and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and could neither
learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they said:
‘There’s a fellow who will give his father some trouble!’ When anything
had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced to do it; but
if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late, or in the
night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any other dismal
place, he answered: ‘Oh, no father, I’ll not go there, it makes me
shudder!’ for he was afraid. Or when stories were told by the fire at
night which made the flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: ‘Oh,
it makes us shudder!’ The younger sat in a corner and listened with
the rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean. ‘They are
always saying: “It makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!” It does not
make me shudder,’ thought he. ‘That, too, must be an art of which I
understand nothing!’

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: ‘Hearken to me,
you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong, and you
too must learn something by which you can earn your bread. Look how your
brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.’ ‘Well, father,’ he
replied, ‘I am quite willing to learn something--indeed, if it could but
be managed, I should like to learn how to shudder. I don’t understand
that at all yet.’ The elder brother smiled when he heard that, and
thought to himself: ‘Goodness, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives! He who wants to
be a sickle must bend himself betimes.’

The father sighed, and answered him: ‘You shall soon learn what it is to
shudder, but you will not earn your bread by that.’

Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father
bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward
in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing. ‘Just think,’
said he, ‘when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he
actually wanted to learn to shudder.’ ‘If that be all,’ replied the
sexton, ‘he can learn that with me. Send him to me, and I will soon
polish him.’ The father was glad to do it, for he thought: ‘It will
train the boy a little.’ The sexton therefore took him into his house,
and he had to ring the church bell. After a day or two, the sexton awoke
him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and
ring the bell. ‘You shall soon learn what shuddering is,’ thought he,
and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at the top of
the tower and turned round, and was just going to take hold of the bell
rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding
hole. ‘Who is there?’ cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did
not move or stir. ‘Give an answer,’ cried the boy, ‘or take yourself
off, you have no business here at night.’

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost. The boy cried a second time: ‘What do you want
here?--speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down the
steps!’ The sexton thought: ‘He can’t mean to be as bad as his words,’
uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy
called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no purpose,
he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so that it fell
down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner. Thereupon he
rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed, and
fell asleep. The sexton’s wife waited a long time for her husband, but
he did not come back. At length she became uneasy, and wakened the boy,
and asked: ‘Do you know where my husband is? He climbed up the tower
before you did.’ ‘No, I don’t know,’ replied the boy, ‘but someone was
standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps, and as he
would neither gave an answer nor go away, I took him for a scoundrel,
and threw him downstairs. Just go there and you will see if it was he.
I should be sorry if it were.’ The woman ran away and found her husband,
who was lying moaning in the corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy’s father, ‘Your boy,’ cried she, ‘has been the cause of a great
misfortune! He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his
leg. Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.’ The father was
terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy. ‘What wicked tricks
are these?’ said he. ‘The devil must have put them into your head.’
‘Father,’ he replied, ‘do listen to me. I am quite innocent. He was
standing there by night like one intent on doing evil. I did not know
who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go
away.’ ‘Ah,’ said the father, ‘I have nothing but unhappiness with you.
Go out of my sight. I will see you no more.’

‘Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day. Then will I
go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.’ ‘Learn what you will,’ spoke
the father, ‘it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers for you.
Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from whence you
come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be ashamed of you.’
‘Yes, father, it shall be as you will. If you desire nothing more than
that, I can easily keep it in mind.’

When the day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!’ Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with
himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could
see the gallows, the man said to him: ‘Look, there is the tree where
seven men have married the ropemaker’s daughter, and are now learning
how to fly. Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes, and you will
soon learn how to shudder.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ answered
the youth, ‘it is easily done; but if I learn how to shudder as fast as
that, you shall have my fifty talers. Just come back to me early in the
morning.’ Then the youth went to the gallows, sat down beneath it, and
waited till evening came. And as he was cold, he lighted himself a fire,
but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire, he
could not get warm. And as the wind knocked the hanged men against each
other, and they moved backwards and forwards, he thought to himself:
‘If you shiver below by the fire, how those up above must freeze and
suffer!’ And as he felt pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed
up, unbound one of them after the other, and brought down all seven.
Then he stoked the fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm
themselves. But they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught
their clothes. So he said: ‘Take care, or I will hang you up again.’ The
dead men, however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their
rags go on burning. At this he grew angry, and said: ‘If you will not
take care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,’ and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said: ‘Well do you know how to shudder?’ ‘No,’
answered he, ‘how should I know? Those fellows up there did not open
their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which
they had on their bodies get burnt.’ Then the man saw that he would not
get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying: ‘Such a youth has
never come my way before.’

The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to
himself: ‘Ah, if I could but shudder! Ah, if I could but shudder!’ A
waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked: ‘Who are
you?’ ‘I don’t know,’ answered the youth. Then the waggoner asked: ‘From
whence do you come?’ ‘I know not.’ ‘Who is your father?’ ‘That I may
not tell you.’ ‘What is it that you are always muttering between your
teeth?’ ‘Ah,’ replied the youth, ‘I do so wish I could shudder, but
no one can teach me how.’ ‘Enough of your foolish chatter,’ said the
waggoner. ‘Come, go with me, I will see about a place for you.’ The
youth went with the waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn
where they wished to pass the night. Then at the entrance of the parlour
the youth again said quite loudly: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could
but shudder!’ The host who heard this, laughed and said: ‘If that is
your desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.’ ‘Ah,
be silent,’ said the hostess, ‘so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.’

But the youth said: ‘However difficult it may be, I will learn it. For
this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth.’ He let the host have
no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a
haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was,
if he would but watch in it for three nights. The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was the
most beautiful maiden the sun shone on. Likewise in the castle lay great
treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these treasures would
then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Already many men
had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come out again. Then the
youth went next morning to the king, and said: ‘If it be allowed, I will
willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle.’

The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he said: ‘You may
ask for three things to take into the castle with you, but they must
be things without life.’ Then he answered: ‘Then I ask for a fire, a
turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.’

The king had these things carried into the castle for him during the
day. When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself
a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe. ‘Ah, if I could
but shudder!’ said he, ‘but I shall not learn it here either.’ Towards
midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing it,
something cried suddenly from one corner: ‘Au, miau! how cold we are!’
‘You fools!’ cried he, ‘what are you crying about? If you are cold, come
and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.’ And when he had said
that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down
on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with their fiery
eyes. After a short time, when they had warmed themselves, they said:
‘Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?’ ‘Why not?’ he replied, ‘but
just show me your paws.’ Then they stretched out their claws. ‘Oh,’ said
he, ‘what long nails you have! Wait, I must first cut them for you.’
Thereupon he seized them by the throats, put them on the cutting-board
and screwed their feet fast. ‘I have looked at your fingers,’ said he,
‘and my fancy for card-playing has gone,’ and he struck them dead and
threw them out into the water. But when he had made away with these two,
and was about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and
corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more
and more of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled
horribly, and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put
it out. He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were
going too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried: ‘Away with you,
vermin,’ and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond. When he came back he fanned
the embers of his fire again and warmed himself. And as he thus sat, his
eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to sleep. Then he
looked round and saw a great bed in the corner. ‘That is the very thing
for me,’ said he, and got into it. When he was just going to shut his
eyes, however, the bed began to move of its own accord, and went over
the whole of the castle. ‘That’s right,’ said he, ‘but go faster.’ Then
the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down,
over thresholds and stairs, but suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside
down, and lay on him like a mountain. But he threw quilts and pillows up
in the air, got out and said: ‘Now anyone who likes, may drive,’ and
lay down by his fire, and slept till it was day. In the morning the king
came, and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil
spirits had killed him and he was dead. Then said he: ‘After all it is a
pity,--for so handsome a man.’ The youth heard it, got up, and said: ‘It
has not come to that yet.’ Then the king was astonished, but very glad,
and asked how he had fared. ‘Very well indeed,’ answered he; ‘one
night is past, the two others will pass likewise.’ Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: ‘I never expected to
see you alive again! Have you learnt how to shudder yet?’ ‘No,’ said he,
‘it is all in vain. If someone would but tell me!’

The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song: ‘If I could but shudder!’ When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder. Then it was quiet for
a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down the
chimney and fell before him. ‘Hullo!’ cried he, ‘another half belongs
to this. This is not enough!’ Then the uproar began again, there was a
roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise. ‘Wait,’ said
he, ‘I will just stoke up the fire a little for you.’ When he had done
that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together, and a
hideous man was sitting in his place. ‘That is no part of our bargain,’
said the youth, ‘the bench is mine.’ The man wanted to push him away;
the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off with all
his strength, and seated himself again in his own place. Then still more
men fell down, one after the other; they brought nine dead men’s legs
and two skulls, and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The
youth also wanted to play and said: ‘Listen you, can I join you?’ ‘Yes,
if you have any money.’ ‘Money enough,’ replied he, ‘but your balls are
not quite round.’ Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round. ‘There, now they will roll better!’
said he. ‘Hurrah! now we’ll have fun!’ He played with them and lost some
of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his
sight. He lay down and quietly fell asleep. Next morning the king came
to inquire after him. ‘How has it fared with you this time?’ asked he.
‘I have been playing at nine-pins,’ he answered, ‘and have lost a couple
of farthings.’ ‘Have you not shuddered then?’ ‘What?’ said he, ‘I have
had a wonderful time! If I did but know what it was to shudder!’

The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly:
‘If I could but shudder.’ When it grew late, six tall men came in and
brought a coffin. Then he said: ‘Ha, ha, that is certainly my little
cousin, who died only a few days ago,’ and he beckoned with his finger,
and cried: ‘Come, little cousin, come.’ They placed the coffin on the
ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay
therein. He felt his face, but it was cold as ice. ‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I
will warm you a little,’ and went to the fire and warmed his hand and
laid it on the dead man’s face, but he remained cold. Then he took him
out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his
arms that the blood might circulate again. As this also did no good, he
thought to himself: ‘When two people lie in bed together, they warm each
other,’ and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down by
him. After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to move.
Then said the youth, ‘See, little cousin, have I not warmed you?’ The
dead man, however, got up and cried: ‘Now will I strangle you.’

‘What!’ said he, ‘is that the way you thank me? You shall at once go
into your coffin again,’ and he took him up, threw him into it, and shut
the lid. Then came the six men and carried him away again. ‘I cannot
manage to shudder,’ said he. ‘I shall never learn it here as long as I
live.’

Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard. ‘You wretch,’ cried he,
‘you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for you shall die.’ ‘Not so
fast,’ replied the youth. ‘If I am to die, I shall have to have a say
in it.’ ‘I will soon seize you,’ said the fiend. ‘Softly, softly, do not
talk so big. I am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.’
‘We shall see,’ said the old man. ‘If you are stronger, I will let you
go--come, we will try.’ Then he led him by dark passages to a smith’s
forge, took an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.
‘I can do better than that,’ said the youth, and went to the other
anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his
white beard hung down. Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil
with one blow, and in it caught the old man’s beard. ‘Now I have you,’
said the youth. ‘Now it is your turn to die.’ Then he seized an iron bar
and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, when he
would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go.
The old man led him back into the castle, and in a cellar showed him
three chests full of gold. ‘Of these,’ said he, ‘one part is for the
poor, the other for the king, the third yours.’ In the meantime it
struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the youth stood in
darkness. ‘I shall still be able to find my way out,’ said he, and felt
about, found the way into the room, and slept there by his fire.
Next morning the king came and said: ‘Now you must have learnt what
shuddering is?’ ‘No,’ he answered; ‘what can it be? My dead cousin was
here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down
below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.’ ‘Then,’ said the
king, ‘you have saved the castle, and shall marry my daughter.’ ‘That
is all very well,’ said he, ‘but still I do not know what it is to
shudder!’

Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated; but howsoever
much the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still
said always: ‘If I could but shudder--if I could but shudder.’ And this
at last angered her. Her waiting-maid said: ‘I will find a cure for him;
he shall soon learn what it is to shudder.’ She went out to the stream
which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons
brought to her. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was
to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water
with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would
sprawl about him. Then he woke up and cried: ‘Oh, what makes me shudder
so?--what makes me shudder so, dear wife? Ah! now I know what it is to
shudder!’




KING GRISLY-BEARD

A great king of a land far away in the East had a daughter who was very
beautiful, but so proud, and haughty, and conceited, that none of the
princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her, and she
only made sport of them.

Once upon a time the king held a great feast, and asked thither all
her suitors; and they all sat in a row, ranged according to their
rank--kings, and princes, and dukes, and earls, and counts, and barons,
and knights. Then the princess came in, and as she passed by them she
had something spiteful to say to every one. The first was too fat: ‘He’s
as round as a tub,’ said she. The next was too tall: ‘What a maypole!’
said she. The next was too short: ‘What a dumpling!’ said she. The
fourth was too pale, and she called him ‘Wallface.’ The fifth was too
red, so she called him ‘Coxcomb.’ The sixth was not straight enough;
so she said he was like a green stick, that had been laid to dry over
a baker’s oven. And thus she had some joke to crack upon every one: but
she laughed more than all at a good king who was there. ‘Look at
him,’ said she; ‘his beard is like an old mop; he shall be called
Grisly-beard.’ So the king got the nickname of Grisly-beard.

But the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved,
and how she ill-treated all his guests; and he vowed that, willing or
unwilling, she should marry the first man, be he prince or beggar, that
came to the door.

Two days after there came by a travelling fiddler, who began to play
under the window and beg alms; and when the king heard him, he said,
‘Let him come in.’ So they brought in a dirty-looking fellow; and when
he had sung before the king and the princess, he begged a boon. Then the
king said, ‘You have sung so well, that I will give you my daughter for
your wife.’ The princess begged and prayed; but the king said, ‘I have
sworn to give you to the first comer, and I will keep my word.’ So words
and tears were of no avail; the parson was sent for, and she was married
to the fiddler. When this was over the king said, ‘Now get ready to
go--you must not stay here--you must travel on with your husband.’

Then the fiddler went his way, and took her with him, and they soon came
to a great wood. ‘Pray,’ said she, ‘whose is this wood?’ ‘It belongs
to King Grisly-beard,’ answered he; ‘hadst thou taken him, all had been
thine.’ ‘Ah! unlucky wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘would that I had
married King Grisly-beard!’ Next they came to some fine meadows. ‘Whose
are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she. ‘They belong to King
Grisly-beard, hadst thou taken him, they had all been thine.’ ‘Ah!
unlucky wretch that I am!’ said she; ‘would that I had married King
Grisly-beard!’

Then they came to a great city. ‘Whose is this noble city?’ said she.
‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard; hadst thou taken him, it had all been
thine.’ ‘Ah! wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘why did I not marry King
Grisly-beard?’ ‘That is no business of mine,’ said the fiddler: ‘why
should you wish for another husband? Am not I good enough for you?’

At last they came to a small cottage. ‘What a paltry place!’ said she;
‘to whom does that little dirty hole belong?’ Then the fiddler said,
‘That is your and my house, where we are to live.’ ‘Where are your
servants?’ cried she. ‘What do we want with servants?’ said he; ‘you
must do for yourself whatever is to be done. Now make the fire, and put
on water and cook my supper, for I am very tired.’ But the princess knew
nothing of making fires and cooking, and the fiddler was forced to help
her. When they had eaten a very scanty meal they went to bed; but the
fiddler called her up very early in the morning to clean the house. Thus
they lived for two days: and when they had eaten up all there was in the
cottage, the man said, ‘Wife, we can’t go on thus, spending money and
earning nothing. You must learn to weave baskets.’ Then he went out and
cut willows, and brought them home, and she began to weave; but it made
her fingers very sore. ‘I see this work won’t do,’ said he: ‘try and
spin; perhaps you will do that better.’ So she sat down and tried to
spin; but the threads cut her tender fingers till the blood ran. ‘See
now,’ said the fiddler, ‘you are good for nothing; you can do no work:
what a bargain I have got! However, I’ll try and set up a trade in pots
and pans, and you shall stand in the market and sell them.’ ‘Alas!’
sighed she, ‘if any of my father’s court should pass by and see me
standing in the market, how they will laugh at me!’

But her husband did not care for that, and said she must work, if she
did not wish to die of hunger. At first the trade went well; for many
people, seeing such a beautiful woman, went to buy her wares, and paid
their money without thinking of taking away the goods. They lived on
this as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of
ware, and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market; but
a drunken soldier soon came by, and rode his horse against her stall,
and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces. Then she began to cry,
and knew not what to do. ‘Ah! what will become of me?’ said she; ‘what
will my husband say?’ So she ran home and told him all. ‘Who would
have thought you would have been so silly,’ said he, ‘as to put an
earthenware stall in the corner of the market, where everybody passes?
but let us have no more crying; I see you are not fit for this sort of
work, so I have been to the king’s palace, and asked if they did not
want a kitchen-maid; and they say they will take you, and there you will
have plenty to eat.’

Thus the princess became a kitchen-maid, and helped the cook to do all
the dirtiest work; but she was allowed to carry home some of the meat
that was left, and on this they lived.

She had not been there long before she heard that the king’s eldest son
was passing by, going to be married; and she went to one of the windows
and looked out. Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of
the court was there. Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly
which had brought her so low. And the servants gave her some of the rich
meats, which she put into her basket to take home.

All on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king’s son in golden
clothes; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door, he took her
by the hand, and said she should be his partner in the dance; but she
trembled for fear, for she saw that it was King Grisly-beard, who was
making sport of her. However, he kept fast hold, and led her in; and the
cover of the basket came off, so that the meats in it fell about. Then
everybody laughed and jeered at her; and she was so abashed, that she
wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth. She sprang to the
door to run away; but on the steps King Grisly-beard overtook her, and
brought her back and said, ‘Fear me not! I am the fiddler who has lived
with you in the hut. I brought you there because I really loved you. I
am also the soldier that overset your stall. I have done all this only
to cure you of your silly pride, and to show you the folly of your
ill-treatment of me. Now all is over: you have learnt wisdom, and it is
time to hold our marriage feast.’

Then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes; and
her father and his whole court were there already, and welcomed her home
on her marriage. Joy was in every face and every heart. The feast was
grand; they danced and sang; all were merry; and I only wish that you
and I had been of the party.




IRON HANS

There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest near his
palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. ‘Perhaps some
accident has befallen him,’ said the king, and the next day he sent out
two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away.
Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said: ‘Scour
the whole forest through, and do not give up until you have found all
three.’ But of these also, none came home again, none were seen again.
From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest,
and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen
of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. This lasted for
many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself to the king as
seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. The
king, however, would not give his consent, and said: ‘It is not safe in
there; I fear it would fare with you no better than with the others,
and you would never come out again.’ The huntsman replied: ‘Lord, I will
venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing.’

The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It was
not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to
pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a
deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of
the water, seized it, and drew it under. When the huntsman saw that, he
went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the
water. When they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body
was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to his
knees. They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. There
was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put
in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened
on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her
keeping. And from this time forth everyone could again go into the
forest with safety.

The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the
courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage.
The boy ran thither and said: ‘Give me my ball out.’ ‘Not till you have
opened the door for me,’ answered the man. ‘No,’ said the boy, ‘I will
not do that; the king has forbidden it,’ and ran away. The next day he
again went and asked for his ball; the wild man said: ‘Open my door,’
but the boy would not. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting,
and the boy went once more and said: ‘I cannot open the door even if I
wished, for I have not the key.’ Then the wild man said: ‘It lies under
your mother’s pillow, you can get it there.’ The boy, who wanted to have
his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. The
door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it
was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried
away. The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him: ‘Oh,
wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten!’ The wild man turned
back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps
into the forest. When the king came home, he observed the empty cage,
and asked the queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it,
and sought the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no one
answered. The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but
they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and
much grief reigned in the royal court.

When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy
down from his shoulder, and said to him: ‘You will never see your father
and mother again, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free,
and I have compassion on you. If you do all I bid you, you shall fare
well. Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the
world.’ He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the
next morning the man took him to a well, and said: ‘Behold, the gold
well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit beside it, and
take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I will
come every evening to see if you have obeyed my order.’ The boy placed
himself by the brink of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a
golden snake show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.
As he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he
involuntarily put it in the water. He drew it quickly out again, but saw
that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold
off again, all was to no purpose. In the evening Iron Hans came back,
looked at the boy, and said: ‘What has happened to the well?’ ‘Nothing
nothing,’ he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the
man might not see it. But he said: ‘You have dipped your finger into
the water, this time it may pass, but take care you do not again let
anything go in.’ By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and
watching it. His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head,
and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly
out, but it was already quite gilded. Iron Hans came, and already knew
what had happened. ‘You have let a hair fall into the well,’ said he.
‘I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the
third time then the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with
me.’

On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger,
however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked at
the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he
still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look
straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into
the water. He raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of
his head was already golden and shone like the sun. You can imagine how
terrified the poor boy was! He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it
round his head, in order that the man might not see it. When he came he
already knew everything, and said: ‘Take the handkerchief off.’ Then the
golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might,
it was of no use. ‘You have not stood the trial and can stay here no
longer. Go forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.
But as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is
one thing I will grant you; if you fall into any difficulty, come to the
forest and cry: “Iron Hans,” and then I will come and help you. My
power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in
abundance.’

Then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten
paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city. There he
looked for work, but could find none, and he learnt nothing by which he
could help himself. At length he went to the palace, and asked if they
would take him in. The people about court did not at all know what use
they could make of him, but they liked him, and told him to stay. At
length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood
and water, and rake the cinders together. Once when it so happened that
no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the
royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he
kept his little cap on. Such a thing as that had never yet come under
the king’s notice, and he said: ‘When you come to the royal table you
must take your hat off.’ He answered: ‘Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad
sore place on my head.’ Then the king had the cook called before him
and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his
service; and that he was to send him away at once. The cook, however,
had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.

And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear
the wind and bad weather. Once in summer when he was working alone in
the garden, the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air
might cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so
that the rays fell into the bedroom of the king’s daughter, and up she
sprang to see what that could be. Then she saw the boy, and cried to
him: ‘Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.’ He put his cap on with all
haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. When he
was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said: ‘How
can you take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go
quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest.’ ‘Oh,
no,’ replied the boy, ‘the wild ones have more scent, and will please
her better.’ When he got into the room, the king’s daughter said: ‘Take
your cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.’ He again
said: ‘I may not, I have a sore head.’ She, however, caught at his
cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his
shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run out, but she
held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. With these he
departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He took them to the
gardener, and said: ‘I present them to your children, they can play with
them.’ The following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he
was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and then he went in with it,
she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him,
but he held it fast with both hands. She again gave him a handful of
ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for
playthings for his children. On the third day things went just the
same; she could not get his cap away from him, and he would not have her
money.

Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The king gathered
together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any
opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty
army. Then said the gardener’s boy: ‘I am grown up, and will go to the
wars also, only give me a horse.’ The others laughed, and said: ‘Seek
one for yourself when we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the
stable for you.’ When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and
led the horse out; it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jib,
hobblety jib; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark
forest. When he came to the outskirts, he called ‘Iron Hans’ three
times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man
appeared immediately, and said: ‘What do you desire?’ ‘I want a strong
steed, for I am going to the wars.’ ‘That you shall have, and still more
than you ask for.’ Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it
was not long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that
snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind
them followed a great troop of warriors entirely equipped in iron, and
their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made over his three-legged
horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the
soldiers. When he got near the battlefield a great part of the king’s
men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give
way. Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like
a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. They
began to flee, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there
was not a single man left. Instead of returning to the king, however, he
conducted his troop by byways back to the forest, and called forth Iron
Hans. ‘What do you desire?’ asked the wild man. ‘Take back your horse
and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.’ All that he
asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse. When
the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and
wished him joy of his victory. ‘I am not the one who carried away the
victory,’ said he, ‘but a strange knight who came to my assistance with
his soldiers.’ The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was,
but the king did not know, and said: ‘He followed the enemy, and I did
not see him again.’ She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but
he smiled, and said: ‘He has just come home on his three-legged horse,
and the others have been mocking him, and crying: “Here comes our
hobblety jib back again!” They asked, too: “Under what hedge have you
been lying sleeping all the time?” So he said: “I did the best of all,
and it would have gone badly without me.” And then he was still more
ridiculed.’

The king said to his daughter: ‘I will proclaim a great feast that shall
last for three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the
unknown man will show himself.’ When the feast was announced, the youth
went out to the forest, and called Iron Hans. ‘What do you desire?’
asked he. ‘That I may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.’ ‘It is
as safe as if you had it already,’ said Iron Hans. ‘You shall likewise
have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited
chestnut-horse.’ When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took
his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one. The king’s
daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none
of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.

On the second day Iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him
a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and
he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it. The king grew
angry, and said: ‘That is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell
his name.’ He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple,
should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come
back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.

On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armour and
a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But when he was riding off
with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near
him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword. The
youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently
that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he
had golden hair. They rode back and announced this to the king.

The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his
boy. ‘He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the
festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise
shown my children three golden apples which he has won.’

The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had
his little cap on his head. But the king’s daughter went up to him and
took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and
he was so handsome that all were amazed. ‘Are you the knight who came
every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught
the three golden apples?’ asked the king. ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘and here
the apples are,’ and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them
to the king. ‘If you desire further proof, you may see the wound which
your people gave me when they followed me. But I am likewise the knight
who helped you to your victory over your enemies.’ ‘If you can perform
such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is your
father?’ ‘My father is a mighty king, and gold have I in plenty as great
as I require.’ ‘I well see,’ said the king, ‘that I owe my thanks to
you; can I do anything to please you?’ ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘that indeed
you can. Give me your daughter to wife.’ The maiden laughed, and said:
‘He does not stand much on ceremony, but I have already seen by his
golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,’ and then she went and
kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great
delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear
son again. And as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music
suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a
great retinue. He went up to the youth, embraced him and said: ‘I am
Iron Hans, and was by enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free;
all the treasures which I possess, shall be your property.’




CAT-SKIN

There was once a king, whose queen had hair of the purest gold, and was
so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of
the earth. But this beautiful queen fell ill, and when she felt that her
end drew near she called the king to her and said, ‘Promise me that you
will never marry again, unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful
as I am, and who has golden hair like mine.’ Then when the king in his
grief promised all she asked, she shut her eyes and died. But the king
was not to be comforted, and for a long time never thought of taking
another wife. At last, however, his wise men said, ‘this will not do;
the king must marry again, that we may have a queen.’ So messengers were
sent far and wide, to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen.
But there was no princess in the world so beautiful; and if there had
been, still there was not one to be found who had golden hair. So the
messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.

Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her mother,
and had the same golden hair. And when she was grown up, the king looked
at her and saw that she was just like this late queen: then he said to
his courtiers, ‘May I not marry my daughter? She is the very image of my
dead wife: unless I have her, I shall not find any bride upon the whole
earth, and you say there must be a queen.’ When the courtiers heard this
they were shocked, and said, ‘Heaven forbid that a father should marry
his daughter! Out of so great a sin no good can come.’ And his daughter
was also shocked, but hoped the king would soon give up such thoughts;
so she said to him, ‘Before I marry anyone I must have three dresses:
one must be of gold, like the sun; another must be of shining silver,
like the moon; and a third must be dazzling as the stars: besides this,
I want a mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur put together, to
which every beast in the kingdom must give a part of his skin.’ And thus
she thought he would think of the matter no more. But the king made the
most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses: one golden,
like the sun; another silvery, like the moon; and a third sparkling,
like the stars: and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in
his kingdom, and to take the finest fur out of their skins: and thus a
mantle of a thousand furs was made.

When all were ready, the king sent them to her; but she got up in the
night when all were asleep, and took three of her trinkets, a golden
ring, a golden necklace, and a golden brooch, and packed the three
dresses--of the sun, the moon, and the stars--up in a nutshell, and
wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur, and besmeared
her face and hands with soot. Then she threw herself upon Heaven for
help in her need, and went away, and journeyed on the whole night, till
at last she came to a large wood. As she was very tired, she sat herself
down in the hollow of a tree and soon fell asleep: and there she slept
on till it was midday.

Now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it, his dogs
came to the tree, and began to snuff about, and run round and round, and
bark. ‘Look sharp!’ said the king to the huntsmen, ‘and see what sort
of game lies there.’ And the huntsmen went up to the tree, and when they
came back again said, ‘In the hollow tree there lies a most wonderful
beast, such as we never saw before; its skin seems to be of a thousand
kinds of fur, but there it lies fast asleep.’ ‘See,’ said the king, ‘if
you can catch it alive, and we will take it with us.’ So the huntsmen
took it up, and the maiden awoke and was greatly frightened, and said,
‘I am a poor child that has neither father nor mother left; have pity on
me and take me with you.’ Then they said, ‘Yes, Miss Cat-skin, you will
do for the kitchen; you can sweep up the ashes, and do things of that
sort.’ So they put her into the coach, and took her home to the king’s
palace. Then they showed her a little corner under the staircase, where
no light of day ever peeped in, and said, ‘Cat-skin, you may lie and
sleep there.’ And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood
and water, to blow the fire, pluck the poultry, pick the herbs, sift the
ashes, and do all the dirty work.

Thus Cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully. ‘Ah! pretty
princess!’ thought she, ‘what will now become of thee?’ But it happened
one day that a feast was to be held in the king’s castle, so she said to
the cook, ‘May I go up a little while and see what is going on? I will
take care and stand behind the door.’ And the cook said, ‘Yes, you may
go, but be back again in half an hour’s time, to rake out the ashes.’
Then she took her little lamp, and went into her cabin, and took off the
fur skin, and washed the soot from off her face and hands, so that her
beauty shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds. She next opened
her nutshell, and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun,
and so went to the feast. Everyone made way for her, for nobody knew
her, and they thought she could be no less than a king’s daughter. But
the king came up to her, and held out his hand and danced with her; and
he thought in his heart, ‘I never saw any one half so beautiful.’

When the dance was at an end she curtsied; and when the king looked
round for her, she was gone, no one knew wither. The guards that stood
at the castle gate were called in: but they had seen no one. The truth
was, that she had run into her little cabin, pulled off her dress,
blackened her face and hands, put on the fur-skin cloak, and was
Cat-skin again. When she went into the kitchen to her work, and began
to rake the ashes, the cook said, ‘Let that alone till the morning, and
heat the king’s soup; I should like to run up now and give a peep: but
take care you don’t let a hair fall into it, or you will run a chance of
never eating again.’

As soon as the cook went away, Cat-skin heated the king’s soup, and
toasted a slice of bread first, as nicely as ever she could; and when it
was ready, she went and looked in the cabin for her little golden ring,
and put it into the dish in which the soup was. When the dance was over,
the king ordered his soup to be brought in; and it pleased him so well,
that he thought he had never tasted any so good before. At the bottom
he saw a gold ring lying; and as he could not make out how it had got
there, he ordered the cook to be sent for. The cook was frightened when
he heard the order, and said to Cat-skin, ‘You must have let a hair fall
into the soup; if it be so, you will have a good beating.’ Then he went
before the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup. ‘I did,’
answered the cook. But the king said, ‘That is not true; it was better
done than you could do it.’ Then he answered, ‘To tell the truth I did
not cook it, but Cat-skin did.’ ‘Then let Cat-skin come up,’ said the
king: and when she came he said to her, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am a poor
child,’ said she, ‘that has lost both father and mother.’ ‘How came you
in my palace?’ asked he. ‘I am good for nothing,’ said she, ‘but to be
scullion-girl, and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head.’ ‘But how
did you get the ring that was in the soup?’ asked the king. Then she
would not own that she knew anything about the ring; so the king sent
her away again about her business.

After a time there was another feast, and Cat-skin asked the cook to let
her go up and see it as before. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but come again in half
an hour, and cook the king the soup that he likes so much.’ Then she
ran to her little cabin, washed herself quickly, and took her dress
out which was silvery as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in,
looking like a king’s daughter, the king went up to her, and rejoiced at
seeing her again, and when the dance began he danced with her. After the
dance was at an end she managed to slip out, so slyly that the king did
not see where she was gone; but she sprang into her little cabin, and
made herself into Cat-skin again, and went into the kitchen to cook the
soup. Whilst the cook was above stairs, she got the golden necklace and
dropped it into the soup; then it was brought to the king, who ate it,
and it pleased him as well as before; so he sent for the cook, who
was again forced to tell him that Cat-skin had cooked it. Cat-skin was
brought again before the king, but she still told him that she was only
fit to have boots and shoes thrown at her head.

But when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third
time, it happened just the same as before. ‘You must be a witch,
Cat-skin,’ said the cook; ‘for you always put something into your soup,
so that it pleases the king better than mine.’ However, he let her go up
as before. Then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars, and
went into the ball-room in it; and the king danced with her again, and
thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then. So whilst
he was dancing with her, he put a gold ring on her finger without her
seeing it, and ordered that the dance should be kept up a long time.
When it was at an end, he would have held her fast by the hand, but she
slipped away, and sprang so quickly through the crowd that he lost sight
of her: and she ran as fast as she could into her little cabin under
the stairs. But this time she kept away too long, and stayed beyond the
half-hour; so she had not time to take off her fine dress, and threw her
fur mantle over it, and in her haste did not blacken herself all over
with soot, but left one of her fingers white.

Then she ran into the kitchen, and cooked the king’s soup; and as soon
as the cook was gone, she put the golden brooch into the dish. When the
king got to the bottom, he ordered Cat-skin to be called once more, and
soon saw the white finger, and the ring that he had put on it whilst
they were dancing: so he seized her hand, and kept fast hold of it, and
when she wanted to loose herself and spring away, the fur cloak fell off
a little on one side, and the starry dress sparkled underneath it.

Then he got hold of the fur and tore it off, and her golden hair and
beautiful form were seen, and she could no longer hide herself: so she
washed the soot and ashes from her face, and showed herself to be the
most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth. But the king said,
‘You are my beloved bride, and we will never more be parted from each
other.’ And the wedding feast was held, and a merry day it was, as ever
was heard of or seen in that country, or indeed in any other.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore
white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the
two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of one another that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together, and when Snow-white said:
‘We will not leave each other,’ Rose-red answered: ‘Never so long as we
live,’ and their mother would add: ‘What one has she must share with the
other.’

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no
beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon
the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss,
and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and did not
worry on their account.

Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused
them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near
their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing
and went into the forest. And when they looked round they found that
they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly
have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces
further. And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who
watches over good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that
it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red took care
of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother’s
bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter
Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hob. The kettle
was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. In the
evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said: ‘Go, Snow-white, and
bolt the door,’ and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took
her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls
listened as they sat and spun. And close by them lay a lamb upon the
floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head
hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, someone
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said:
‘Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking
shelter.’ Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a
poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black
head within the door.

Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered,
and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed. But the bear began
to speak and said: ‘Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm! I am
half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you.’

‘Poor bear,’ said the mother, ‘lie down by the fire, only take care that
you do not burn your coat.’ Then she cried: ‘Snow-white, Rose-red, come
out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.’ So they both came
out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid
of him. The bear said: ‘Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a
little’; so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean;
and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably. It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played
tricks with their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands,
put their feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a
hazel-switch and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. But the
bear took it all in good part, only when they were too rough he called
out: ‘Leave me alive, children,

  Snow-white, Rose-red,
  Will you beat your wooer dead?’

When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the
bear: ‘You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from
the cold and the bad weather.’ As soon as day dawned the two children
let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were
never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one
morning to Snow-white: ‘Now I must go away, and cannot come back for the
whole summer.’ ‘Where are you going, then, dear bear?’ asked Snow-white.
‘I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again.’

Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unbolted the
door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to Snow-white
as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about
it. The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the
trees.

A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest
to get firewood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and
forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. When
they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping about like a dog
tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried: ‘Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?’ ‘What are you up to,
little man?’ asked Rose-red. ‘You stupid, prying goose!’ answered the
dwarf: ‘I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking.
The little bit of food that we people get is immediately burnt up with
heavy logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had
just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished;
but the cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the
tree closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white
beard; so now it is tight and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek,
milk-faced things laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!’

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast. ‘I will run and fetch someone,’ said Rose-red. ‘You
senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf; ‘why should you fetch someone? You
are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?’
‘Don’t be impatient,’ said Snow-white, ‘I will help you,’ and she pulled
her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it
up, grumbling to himself: ‘Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine
beard. Bad luck to you!’ and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time afterwards Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish
of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. ‘Where are you going?’ said
Rose-red; ‘you surely don’t want to go into the water?’ ‘I am not such
a fool!’ cried the dwarf; ‘don’t you see that the accursed fish wants
to pull me in?’ The little man had been sitting there fishing, and
unluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line; a
moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeble creature had not
strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the
dwarf towards him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of
little good, for he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and
was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast
together. There was nothing to do but to bring out the scissors and cut
the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that
he screamed out: ‘Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man’s
face? Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have
cut off the best part of it. I cannot let myself be seen by my people.
I wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!’ Then he took
out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without another word
he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led them
across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn about. There
they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and
round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a
rock not far away. Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran
up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance
the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried
with his shrill voice: ‘Could you not have done it more carefully! You
dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you
clumsy creatures!’ Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and
slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls, who by
this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their
business in town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that anyone would come there so late. The evening
sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with
all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and stared
at them. ‘Why do you stand gaping there?’ cried the dwarf, and his
ashen-grey face became copper-red with rage. He was still cursing when a
loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out
of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not reach
his cave, for the bear was already close. Then in the dread of his heart
he cried: ‘Dear Mr Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures;
look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my life; what do you
want with such a slender little fellow as I? you would not feel me
between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender
morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!’ The
bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single
blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called to them: ‘Snow-white and
Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you.’ Then they
recognized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly
his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in
gold. ‘I am a king’s son,’ he said, ‘and I was bewitched by that wicked
dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have had to run about the forest
as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his
well-deserved punishment.

Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they
divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.


*****


The Brothers Grimm, Jacob (1785-1863) and Wilhelm (1786-1859), were born
in Hanau, near Frankfurt, in the German state of Hesse. Throughout
their lives they remained close friends, and both studied law at Marburg
University. Jacob was a pioneer in the study of German philology,
and although Wilhelm’s work was hampered by poor health the brothers
collaborated in the creation of a German dictionary, not completed until
a century after their deaths. But they were best (and universally) known
for the collection of over two hundred folk tales they made from oral
sources and published in two volumes of ‘Nursery and Household Tales’ in
1812 and 1814. Although their intention was to preserve such material as
part of German cultural and literary history, and their collection was
first published with scholarly notes and no illustration, the tales soon
came into the possession of young readers. This was in part due to Edgar
Taylor, who made the first English translation in 1823, selecting about
fifty stories ‘with the amusement of some young friends principally in
view.’ They have been an essential ingredient of children’s reading ever
since.





End of Project Gutenberg’s Grimms’ Fairy Tales, by The Brothers Grimm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMMS’ FAIRY TALES ***

***** This file should be named 2591-0.txt or 2591-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/2591/

Produced by Emma Dudding, John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿CHAPTER I

THE THREE GOLDEN APPLES


Did you ever hear of the golden apples that grew in the garden of the
Hesperides? Ah, those were such apples as would bring a great price, by
the bushel, if any of them could be found growing in the orchards of
nowadays! But there is not, I suppose, a graft of that wonderful fruit
on a single tree in the wide world. Not so much as a seed of those
apples exists any longer.

And, even in the old, old, half-forgotten times, before the garden of
the Hesperides was overrun with weeds, a great many people doubted
whether there could be real trees that bore apples of solid gold upon
their branches. All had heard of them, but nobody remembered to have
seen any. Children, nevertheless, used to listen, open-mouthed, to
stories of the golden apple tree, and resolved to discover it, when they
should be big enough. Adventurous young men, who desired to do a braver
thing than any of their fellows, set out in quest of this fruit. Many of
them returned no more; none of them brought back the apples. No wonder
that they found it impossible to gather them! It is said that there was
a dragon beneath the tree, with a hundred terrible heads, fifty of
which were always on the watch, while the other fifty slept.

In my opinion it was hardly worth running so much risk for the sake of a
solid golden apple. Had the apples been sweet, mellow, and juicy, indeed
that would be another matter. There might then have been some sense in
trying to get at them, in spite of the hundred-headed dragon.

But, as I have already told you, it was quite a common thing with young
persons, when tired of too much peace and rest, to go in search of the
garden of the Hesperides. And once the adventure was undertaken by a
hero who had enjoyed very little peace or rest since he came into the
world. At the time of which I am going to speak, he was wandering
through the pleasant land of Italy, with a mighty club in his hand, and
a bow and quiver slung across his shoulders. He was wrapt in the skin of
the biggest and fiercest lion that ever had been seen, and which he
himself had killed; and though, on the whole, he was kind, and generous,
and noble, there was a good deal of the lion's fierceness in his heart.
As he went on his way, he continually inquired whether that were the
right road to the famous garden. But none of the country people knew
anything about the matter, and many looked as if they would have laughed
at the question, if the stranger had not carried so very big a club.

So he journeyed on and on, still making the same inquiry, until, at
last, he came to the brink of a river where some beautiful young women
sat twining wreaths of flowers.

"Can you tell me, pretty maidens," asked the stranger, "whether this is
the right way to the garden of the Hesperides?"

The young women had been having a fine time together, weaving the
flowers into wreaths, and crowning one another's heads. And there seemed
to be a kind of magic in the touch of their fingers, that made the
flowers more fresh and dewy, and of brighter hues, and sweeter
fragrance, while they played with them, than even when they had been
growing on their native stems. But, on hearing the stranger's question,
they dropped all their flowers on the grass, and gazed at him with
astonishment.

"The garden of the Hesperides!" cried one. "We thought mortals had been
weary of seeking it, after so many disappointments. And pray,
adventurous traveller, what do you want there?"

"A certain king, who is my cousin," replied he, "has ordered me to get
him three of the golden apples."

"Most of the young men who go in quest of these apples," observed
another of the damsels, "desire to obtain them for themselves, or to
present them to some fair maiden whom they love. Do you, then, love this
king, your cousin, so very much?"

"Perhaps not," replied the stranger, sighing. "He has often been severe
and cruel to me. But it is my destiny to obey him."

"And do you know," asked the damsel who had first spoken, "that a
terrible dragon, with a hundred heads, keeps watch under the golden
apple tree?"

"I know it well," answered the stranger, calmly. "But, from my cradle
upward, it has been my business, and almost my pastime, to deal with
serpents and dragons."

The young women looked at his massive club, and at the shaggy lion's
skin which he wore, and likewise at his heroic limbs and figure; and
they whispered to each other that the stranger appeared to be one who
might reasonably expect to perform deeds far beyond the might of other
men. But, then, the dragon with a hundred heads! What mortal, even if he
possessed a hundred lives, could hope to escape the fangs of such a
monster? So kind-hearted were the maidens that they could not bear to
see this brave and handsome traveller attempt what was so very
dangerous, and devote himself, most probably, to become a meal for the
dragon's hundred ravenous mouths.

"Go back," cried they all--"go back to your own home! Your mother,
beholding you safe and sound, will shed tears of joy; and what can she
do more, should you win ever so great a victory? No matter for the
golden apples! No matter for the king, your cruel cousin! We do not wish
the dragon with the hundred heads to eat you up!"

The stranger seemed to grow impatient at these remonstrances. He
carelessly lifted his mighty club, and let it fall upon a rock that lay
half buried in the earth, near by. With the force of that idle blow, the
great rock was shattered all to pieces. It cost the stranger no more
effort to achieve this feat of a giant's strength than for one of the
young maidens to touch her sister's rosy cheek with a flower.

"Do you not believe," said he, looking at the damsels with a smile,
"that such a blow would have crushed one of the dragon's hundred heads?"

Then he sat down on the grass, and told them the story of his life, or
as much of it as he could remember, from the day when he was first
cradled in a warrior's brazen shield. While he lay there, two immense
serpents came gliding over the floor, and opened their hideous jaws to
devour him; and he, a baby of a few months old, had griped one of the
fierce snakes in each of his little fists, and strangled them to death.
When he was but a stripling, he had killed a huge lion, almost as big as
the one whose vast and shaggy hide he now wore upon his shoulders. The
next thing that he had done was to fight a battle with an ugly sort of
monster, called a hydra, which had no less than nine heads, and
exceedingly sharp teeth in every one.

"But the dragon of the Hesperides, you know," observed one of the
damsels, "has a hundred heads!"

"Nevertheless," replied the stranger, "I would rather fight two such
dragons than a single hydra. For, as fast as I cut off a head, two
others grew in its place; and, besides, there was one of the heads that
could not possibly be killed, but kept biting as fiercely as ever, long
after it was cut off. So I was forced to bury it under a stone, where it
is doubtless alive to this very day. But the hydra's body, and its eight
other heads, will never do any further mischief."

The damsels, judging that the story was likely to last a good while, had
been preparing a repast of bread and grapes, that the stranger might
refresh himself in the intervals of his talk. They took pleasure in
helping him to this simple food; and, now and then, one of them would
put a sweet grape between her rosy lips, lest it should make him bashful
to eat alone.

The traveller proceeded to tell how he had chased a very swift stag for
a twelvemonth together, without ever stopping to take breath, and had at
last caught it by the antlers, and carried it home alive. And he had
fought with a very odd race of people, half horses and half men, and had
put them all to death, from a sense of duty, in order that their ugly
figures might never be seen any more. Besides all this, he took to
himself great credit for having cleaned out a stable.

"Do you call that a wonderful exploit?" asked one of the young maidens,
with a smile. "Any clown in the country has done as much!"

"Had it been an ordinary stable," replied the stranger, "I should not
have mentioned it. But this was so gigantic a task that it would have
taken me all my life to perform it, if I had not luckily thought of
turning the channel of a river through the stable door. That did the
business in a very short time!"

Seeing how earnestly his fair auditors listened, he next told them how
he had shot some monstrous birds, and had caught a wild bull alive and
let him go again, and had tamed a number of very wild horses, and had
conquered Hippolyta, the warlike queen of the Amazons. He mentioned,
likewise, that he had taken off Hippolyta's enchanted girdle and had
given it to the daughter of his cousin, the king.

"Was it the girdle of Venus," inquired the prettiest of the damsels,
"which makes women beautiful?"

"No," answered the stranger. "It had formerly been the sword belt of
Mars; and it can only make the wearer valiant and courageous."

"An old sword belt!" cried the damsel, tossing her head. "Then I should
not care about having it!"

"You are right," said the stranger.

Going on with his wonderful narrative, he informed the maidens that as
strange an adventure as ever happened was when he fought with Geryon,
the six-legged man. This was a very odd and frightful sort of figure, as
you may well believe. Any person, looking at his tracks in the sand or
snow, would suppose that three sociable companions had been walking
along together. On hearing his footsteps at a little distance, it was no
more than reasonable to judge that several people must be coming. But it
was only the strange man Geryon clattering onward, with his six legs!

Six legs, and one gigantic body! Certainly, he must have been a very
queer monster to look at; and, my stars, what a waste of shoe leather!

When the stranger had finished the story of his adventures, he looked
around at the attentive faces of the maidens.

"Perhaps you may have heard of me before," said he, modestly. "My name
is Hercules!"

"We had already guessed it," replied the maidens; "for your wonderful
deeds are known all over the world. We do not think it strange, any
longer, that you should set out in quest of the golden apples of the
Hesperides. Come, sisters, let us crown the hero with flowers!"

Then they flung beautiful wreaths over his stately head and mighty
shoulders, so that the lion's skin was almost entirely covered with
roses. They took possession of his ponderous club, and so entwined it
about with the brightest, softest, and most fragrant blossoms that not a
finger's breadth of its oaken substance could be seen. It looked all
like a huge bunch of flowers. Lastly, they joined hands, and danced
around him, chanting words which became poetry of their own accord, and
grew into a choral song, in honour of the illustrious Hercules.

And Hercules was rejoiced, as any other hero would have been, to know
that these fair young girls had heard of the valiant deeds which it had
cost him so much toil and danger to achieve. But still he was not
satisfied. He could not think that what he had already done was worthy
of so much honour, while there remained any bold or difficult adventure
to be undertaken.

"Dear maidens," said he, when they paused to take breath, "now that you
know my name, will you not tell me how I am to reach the garden of the
Hesperides?"

"Ah! must you go to soon?" they exclaimed. "You--that have performed so
many wonders, and spent such a toilsome life--cannot you content
yourself to repose a little while on the margin of this peaceful river?"

Hercules shook his head.

"I must depart now," said he.

"We will then give you the best directions we can," replied the damsels.
"You must go to the seashore, and find out the Old One, and compel him
to inform you where the golden apples are to be found."

"The Old One!" repeated Hercules, laughing at this odd name. "And, pray,
who may the Old One be?"

"Why, the Old Man of the Sea, to be sure!" answered one of the damsels.
"He has fifty daughters, whom some people call very beautiful; but we do
not think it proper to be acquainted with them, because they have
sea-green hair, and taper away like fishes. You must talk with this Old
Man of the Sea. He is a seafaring person, and knows all about the garden
of the Hesperides, for it is situated in an island which he is often in
the habit of visiting."

Hercules then asked whereabouts the Old One was most likely to be met
with. When the damsels had informed him, he thanked them for all their
kindness,--for the bread and grapes with which they had fed him, the
lovely flowers with which they had crowned him, and the songs and
dances wherewith they had done him honour--and he thanked them, most of
all, for telling him the right way--and immediately set forth upon his
journey.

But, before he was out of hearing, one of the maidens called after him.

"Keep fast hold of the Old One, when you catch him!" cried she, smiling,
and lifting her finger to make the caution more impressive. "Do not be
astonished at anything that may happen. Only hold him fast, and he will
tell you what you wish to know."

Hercules again thanked her, and pursued his way, while the maidens
resumed their pleasant labour of making flower wreaths. They talked
about the hero long after he was gone.

"We will crown him with the loveliest of our garlands," said they, "when
he returns hither with the three golden apples, after slaying the dragon
with a hundred heads."

Meanwhile, Hercules travelled constantly onward, over hill and dale, and
through the solitary woods. Sometimes he swung his club aloft, and
splintered a mighty oak with a downright blow. His mind was so full of
the giants and monsters with whom it was the business of his life to
fight, that perhaps he mistook the great tree for a giant or a monster.
And so eager was Hercules to achieve what he had undertaken, that he
almost regretted to have spent so much time with the damsels, wasting
idle breath upon the story of his adventures. But thus it always is with
persons who are destined to perform great things. What they have already
done seems less than nothing. What they have taken in hand to do seems
worth toil, danger, and life itself. Persons who happened to be passing
through the forest must have been affrighted to see him smite the trees
with his great club. With but a single blow, the trunk was riven as by
the stroke of lightning and the broad boughs came rustling and crashing
down.

Hastening forward, without ever pausing or looking behind, he by and by
heard the sea roaring at a distance. At this sound, he increased his
speed, and soon came to a beach, where the great surf waves tumbled
themselves upon the hard sand, in a long line of snowy foam. At one end
of the beach, however, there was a pleasant spot, where some green
shrubbery clambered up a cliff, making its rocky face look soft and
beautiful. A carpet of verdant grass, largely intermixed with
sweet-smelling clover, covered the narrow space between the bottom of
the cliff and the sea. And what should Hercules espy there but an old
man, fast asleep!

But was it really and truly an old man? Certainly, at first sight, it
looked very like one; but, on closer inspection, it rather seemed to be
some kind of a creature that lived in the sea. For on his legs and arms
there were scales, such as fishes have; he was web-footed and
web-fingered, after the fashion of a duck; and his long beard, being of
a greenish tinge, had more the appearance of a tuft of seaweed than of
an ordinary beard. Have you never seen a stick of timber, that has been
long tossed about by the waves, and has got all overgrown with
barnacles, and, at last drifting ashore, seems to have been thrown up
from the very deepest bottom of the sea. Well, the old man would have
put you in mind of just such a wave-tossed spar! But Hercules, the
instant he set eyes on this strange figure, was convinced that it could
be no other than the Old One, who was to direct him on his way.

Yes, it was the selfsame Old Man of the Sea whom the hospitable maidens
had talked to him about. Thanking his stars for the lucky accident of
finding the old fellow asleep, Hercules stole on tiptoe toward him, and
caught him by the arm and leg.

"Tell me," cried he, before the Old One was well awake, "which is the
way to the garden of the Hesperides?"

As you may easily imagine, the Old Man of the Sea awoke in a fright. But
his astonishment could hardly have been greater than was that of
Hercules, the next moment. For, all of a sudden, the Old One seemed to
disappear out of his grasp, and he found himself holding a stag by the
fore and hind leg! But still he kept fast hold. Then the stag
disappeared, and in its stead there was a sea bird, fluttering and
screaming, while Hercules clutched it by the wing and claw! But the bird
could not get away. Immediately afterward, there was an ugly
three-headed dog, which growled and barked at Hercules, and snapped
fiercely at the hands by which he held him! But Hercules would not let
him go. In another minute, instead of the three-headed dog, what should
appear but Geryon, the six-legged man monster, kicking at Hercules with
five of his legs, in order to get the remaining one at liberty! But
Hercules held on. By and by, no Geryon was there, but a huge snake, like
one of those which Hercules had strangled in his babyhood, only a
hundred times as big; and it twisted and twined about the hero's neck
and body, and threw its tail high into the air, and opened its deadly
jaws as if to devour him outright; so that it was really a very terrible
spectacle! But Hercules was no whit disheartened, and squeezed the great
snake so tightly that he soon began to hiss with pain.

You must understand that the Old Man of the Sea, though he generally
looked so much like the wave-beaten figurehead of a vessel, had the
power of assuming any shape he pleased. When he found himself so roughly
seized by Hercules, he had been in hopes of putting him into such
surprise and terror, by these magical transformations, that the hero
would be glad to let him go. If Hercules had relaxed his grasp, the Old
One would certainly have plunged down to the very bottom of the sea,
whence he would not soon have given himself the trouble of coming up, in
order to answer any impertinent questions. Ninety-nine people out of a
hundred, I suppose, would have been frightened out of their wits by the
very first of his ugly shapes, and would have taken to their heels at
once. For one of the hardest things in this world is to see the
difference between real dangers and imaginary ones.

But, as Hercules held on so stubbornly, and only squeezed the Old One so
much the tighter at every change of shape, and really put him to no
small torture, he finally thought it best to reappear in his own figure.
So there he was again, a fishy, scaly, web-footed sort of personage,
with something like a tuft of seaweed at his chin.

"Pray, what do you want with me?" cried the Old One, as soon as he could
take breath; for it is quite a tiresome affair to go through so many
false shapes. "Why do you squeeze me so hard? Let me go this moment, or
I shall begin to consider you an extremely uncivil person!"

"My name is Hercules!" roared the mighty stranger. "And you will never
get out of my clutch until you tell me the nearest way to the garden of
the Hesperides!"

When the old fellow heard who it was that had caught him, he saw with
half an eye that it would be necessary to tell him everything that he
wanted to know. The Old One was an inhabitant of the sea, you must
recollect, and roamed about everywhere, like other seafaring people. Of
course, he had often heard of the fame of Hercules, and of the wonderful
things that he was constantly performing in various parts of the earth,
and how determined he always was to accomplish whatever he undertook. He
therefore made no more attempts to escape, but told the hero how to find
the garden of the Hesperides, and likewise warned him of many
difficulties which must be overcome before he could arrive thither.

"You must go on, thus and thus," said the Old Man of the Sea, after
taking the points of the compass, "till you come in sight of a very tall
giant, who holds the sky on his shoulders. And the giant, if he happens
to be in the humour, will tell you exactly where the garden of the
Hesperides lies."

"And if the giant happens not to be in the humour," remarked Hercules,
balancing his club on the tip of his finger, "perhaps I shall find means
to persuade him!"

Thanking the Old Man of the Sea, and begging his pardon for having
squeezed him so roughly, the hero resumed his journey. He met with a
great many strange adventures, which would be well worth your hearing,
if I had leisure to narrate them as minutely as they deserve.

It was in this journey, if I mistake not, that he encountered a
prodigious giant, who was so wonderfully contrived by nature that, every
time he touched the earth, he became ten times as strong as ever he had
been before. His name was Antæus. You may see, plainly enough, that it
was a very difficult business to fight with such a fellow; for, as often
as he got a knock-down blow, up he started again, stronger, fiercer, and
abler to use his weapons than if his enemy had let him alone. Thus, the
harder Hercules pounded the giant with his club, the further he seemed
from winning the victory. I have sometimes argued with such people, but
never fought with one. The only way in which Hercules found it possible
to finish the battle was by lifting Antæus off his feet into the air,
and squeezing, and squeezing, and squeezing him until, finally, the
strength was quite squeezed out of his enormous body.

When this affair was finished, Hercules continued his travels, and went
to the land of Egypt, where he was taken prisoner, and would have been
put to death if he had not slain the king of the country and made his
escape. Passing through the deserts of Africa, and going as fast as he
could, he arrived at last on the shore of the great ocean. And here,
unless he could walk on the crests of the billows, it seemed as if his
journey must needs be at an end.

Nothing was before him, save the foaming, dashing, measureless ocean.
But, suddenly, as he looked toward the horizon, he saw something, a
great way off, which he had not seen the moment before. It gleamed very
brightly, almost as you may have beheld the round, golden disc of the
sun, when it rises or sets over the edge of the world. It evidently drew
nearer; for, at every instant, this wonderful object became larger and
more lustrous. At length, it had come so nigh that Hercules discovered
it to be an immense cup or bowl, made either of gold or burnished brass.
How it had got afloat upon the sea is more than I can tell you. There it
was, at all events, rolling on the tumultuous billows, which tossed it
up and down, and heaved their foamy tops against its sides, but without
ever throwing their spray over the brim.

"I have seen many giants, in my time," thought Hercules, "but never one
that would need to drink his wine out of a cup like this!"

And, true enough, what a cup it must have been! It was as large--as
large--but, in short, I am afraid to say how immeasurably large it was.
To speak within bounds, it was ten times larger than a great mill wheel;
and, all of metal as it was, it floated over the heaving surges more
lightly than an acorn cup adown the brook. The waves tumbled it onward,
until it grazed against the shore, within a short distance of the spot
where Hercules was standing.

As soon as this happened, he knew what was to be done; for he had not
gone through so many remarkable adventures without learning pretty well
how to conduct himself, whenever anything came to pass a little out of
the common rule. It was just as clear as daylight that this marvellous
cup had been set adrift by some unseen power, and guided hitherward, in
order to carry Hercules across the sea, on his way to the garden of the
Hesperides. Accordingly, without a moment's delay, he clambered over the
brim, and slid down on the inside, where, spreading out his lion's skin,
he proceeded to take a little repose. He had scarcely rested, until now,
since he bade farewell to the damsels on the margin of the river. The
waves dashed, with a pleasant and ringing sound, against the
circumference of the hollow cup; it rocked lightly to and fro, and the
motion was so soothing that it speedily rocked Hercules into an
agreeable slumber.

His nap had probably lasted a good while, when the cup chanced to graze
against a rock, and, in consequence, immediately resounded and
reverberated through its golden or brazen substance, a hundred times as
loudly as ever you heard a church bell. The noise awoke Hercules, who
instantly started up and gazed around him, wondering whereabouts he was.
He was not long in discovering that the cup had floated across a great
part of the sea, and was approaching the shore of what seemed to be an
island. And, on that island, what do you think he saw?

No; you will never guess it, not if you were to try fifty thousand
times! It positively appears to me that this was the most marvellous
spectacle that had ever been seen by Hercules in the whole course of his
wonderful travels and adventures. It was a greater marvel than the hydra
with nine heads, which kept growing twice as fast as they were cut off;
greater than the six-legged man monster; greater than Antæus; greater
than anything that was ever beheld by anybody, before or since the days
of Hercules, or than anything that remains to be beheld by travellers in
all time to come. It was a giant!

But such an intolerably big giant! A giant as tall as a mountain; so
vast a giant that the clouds rested about his midst, like a girdle, and
hung like a hoary beard from his chin, and flitted before his huge eyes,
so that he could neither see Hercules nor the golden cup in which he was
voyaging. And, most wonderful of all, the giant held up his great hands
and appeared to support the sky, which, so far as Hercules could discern
through the clouds, was resting upon his head! This does really seem
almost too much to believe.

Meanwhile, the bright cup continued to float onward, and finally touched
the strand. Just then a breeze wafted away the clouds from before the
giant's visage, and Hercules beheld it, with all its enormous features;
eyes each of them as big as yonder lake, a nose a mile long, and a mouth
of the same width. It was a countenance terrible from its enormity of
size, but disconsolate and weary, even as you may see the faces of many
people, nowadays, who are compelled to sustain burdens above their
strength. What the sky was to the giant, such are the cares of earth to
those who let themselves be weighed down by them. And whenever men
undertake what is beyond the just measure of their abilities, they
encounter precisely such a doom as had befallen this poor giant.

Poor fellow! He had evidently stood there a long while. An ancient
forest had been growing and decaying around his feet; and oak trees, of
six or seven centuries old, had sprung from the acorn, and forced
themselves between his toes.

The giant now looked down from the far height of his great eyes, and,
perceiving Hercules, roared out, in a voice that resembled thunder,
proceeding out of the cloud that had just flitted away from his face.

"Who are you, down at my feet there? And whence do you come in that
little cup?"

"I am Hercules!" thundered back the hero, in a voice pretty nearly or
quite as loud as the giant's own. "And I am seeking for the garden of
the Hesperides!"

"Ho! ho! ho!" roared the giant, in a fit of immense laughter. "That is a
wise adventure, truly!"

"And why not?" cried Hercules, getting a little angry at the giant's
mirth. "Do you think I am afraid of the dragon with a hundred heads!"

Just at this time, while they were talking together, some black clouds
gathered about the giant's middle, and burst into a tremendous storm of
thunder and lightning, causing such a pother that Hercules found it
impossible to distinguish a word. Only the giant's immeasurable legs
were to be seen, standing up into the obscurity of the tempest; and, now
and then, a momentary glimpse of his whole figure, mantled in a volume
of mist. He seemed to be speaking, most of the time; but his big, deep,
rough voice chimed in with the reverberations of the thunder claps, and
rolled away over the hills, like them. Thus, by talking out of season,
the foolish giant expended an incalculable quantity of breath to no
purpose; for the thunder spoke quite as intelligibly as he.

At last, the storm swept over as suddenly as it had come. And there
again was the clear sky, and the weary giant holding it up, and the
pleasant sunshine beaming over his vast height, and illuminating it
against the background of the sullen thunder clouds. So far above the
shower had been his head, that not a hair of it was moistened by the
rain-drops!

When the giant could see Hercules still standing on the seashore, he
roared out to him anew.

"I am Atlas, the mightiest giant in the world! And I hold the sky upon
my head!"

"So I see," answered Hercules. "But, can you show me the way to the
garden of the Hesperides?"

"What do you want there?" asked the giant.

"I want three of the golden apples," shouted Hercules, "for my cousin,
the king."

"There is nobody but myself," quoth the giant, "that can go to the
garden of the Hesperides, and gather the golden apples. If it were not
for this little business of holding up the sky, I would make half a
dozen steps across the sea and get them for you."

"You are very kind," replied Hercules. "And cannot you rest the sky upon
a mountain?"

"None of them are quite high enough," said Atlas, shaking his head. "But
if you were to take your stand on the summit of that nearest one, your
head would be pretty nearly on a level with mine. You seem to be a
fellow of some strength. What if you should take my burden on your
shoulders, while I do your errand for you?"

Hercules, as you must be careful to remember, was a remarkably strong
man; and though it certainly requires a great deal of muscular power to
uphold the sky, yet, if any mortal could be supposed capable of such an
exploit, he was the one. Nevertheless, it seemed so difficult an
undertaking that, for the first time in his life, he hesitated.

"Is the sky very heavy?" he inquired.

"Why, not particularly so, at first," answered the giant, shrugging his
shoulders. "But it gets to be a little burdensome after a thousand
years!"

"And how long a time," asked the hero, "will it take you to get the
golden apples?"

"Oh, that will be done in a few moments," cried Atlas. "I shall take ten
or fifteen miles at a stride, and be at the garden and back again before
your shoulders begin to ache."

"Well, then," answered Hercules, "I will climb the mountain behind you
there and relieve you of your burden."

The truth is, Hercules had a kind heart of his own, and considered that
he should be doing the giant a favour by allowing him this opportunity
for a ramble. And, besides, he thought that it would be still more for
his own glory if he could boast of upholding the sky, than merely to do
so ordinary a thing as to conquer a dragon with a hundred heads.
Accordingly, without more words, the sky was shifted from the shoulders
of Atlas and placed upon those of Hercules.

When this was safely accomplished, the first thing that the giant did
was to stretch himself; and you may imagine what a prodigious spectacle
he was then. Next, lie slowly lifted one of his feet out of the forest
that had grown up around it; then, the other. Then, all at once, he
began to caper, and leap, and dance for joy at his freedom; flinging
himself nobody knows how high into the air, and floundering down again
with a shock that made the earth tremble. Then he laughed--Ho! ho!
ho!--with a thunderous roar that was echoed from the mountains, far and
near, as if they and the giant had been so many rejoicing brothers. When
his joy had a little subsided, he stepped into the sea; ten miles at the
first stride, which brought him midleg deep; and ten miles at the
second, when the water came just above his knees; and ten miles more at
the third, by which he was immersed nearly to his waist. This was the
greatest depth of the sea.

Hercules watched the giant as he still went onward; for it was really a
wonderful sight, this immense human form, more than thirty miles off,
half hidden in the ocean, but with his upper half as tall, and misty,
and blue as a distant mountain. At last the gigantic shape faded
entirely out of view. And now Hercules began to consider what he should
do in case Atlas should be drowned in the sea, or if he were to be stung
to death by the dragon with the hundred heads, which guarded the golden
apples of the Hesperides. If any such misfortune were to happen, how
could he ever get rid of the sky? And, by the by, its weight began
already to be a little irksome to his head and shoulders.

"I really pity the poor giant," thought Hercules. "If it wearies me so
much in ten minutes, how must it have wearied him in a thousand years!"

O my sweet little people, you have no idea what a weight there was in
that same blue sky, which looks so soft and aërial above our heads! And
there, too, was the bluster of the wind, and the chill and watery
clouds, and the blazing sun, all taking their turns to make Hercules
uncomfortable! He began to be afraid that the giant would never come
back. He gazed wistfully at the world beneath him, and acknowledged to
himself that it was a far happier kind of life to be a shepherd at the
foot of a mountain than to stand on its dizzy summit and bear up the
firmament with his might and main. For, of course, as you will easily
understand, Hercules had an immense responsibility on his mind, as well
as a weight on his head and shoulders. Why, if he did not stand
perfectly still, and keep the sky immovable, the sun would perhaps be
put ajar! Or, after nightfall, a great many of the stars might be
loosened from their places, and shower down, like fiery rain, upon the
people's heads! And how ashamed would the hero be if, owing to his
unsteadiness beneath its weight, the sky should crack and show a great
fissure quite across it!

I know not how long it was before, to his unspeakable joy, he beheld the
huge shape of the giant, like a cloud, on the far-off edge of the sea.
At his nearer approach, Atlas held up his hand, in which Hercules could
perceive three magnificent golden apples, as big as pumpkins, all
hanging from one branch.

"I am glad to see you again," shouted Hercules, when the giant was
within hearing. "So you have got the golden apples?"

"Certainly, certainly," answered Atlas; "and very fair apples they are.
I took the finest that grew on the tree, I assure you. Ah! it is a
beautiful spot, that garden of Hesperides. Yes; and the dragon with a
hundred heads is a sight worth any man's seeing. After all, you had
better have gone for the apples yourself."

"No matter," replied Hercules. "You have had a pleasant ramble, and have
done the business as well as I could. I heartily thank you for your
trouble. And now, as I have a long way to go, and am rather in
haste--and as the king, my cousin, is anxious to receive the golden
apples--will you be kind enough to take the sky off my shoulders again?"

"Why, as to that," said the giant, chucking the golden apples into the
air twenty miles high, or thereabouts and catching them as they came
down--"as to that, my good friend, I consider you a little unreasonable.
Cannot I carry the golden apples to the king, your cousin, much quicker
than you could? As His Majesty is in such a hurry to get them, I promise
you to take my longest strides. And, besides, I have no fancy for
burdening myself with the sky, just now."

Here Hercules grew impatient, and gave a great shrug of his shoulders.
It being now twilight, you might have seen two or three stars tumble out
of their places. Everybody on earth looked upward in affright, thinking
that the sky might be going to fall next.

"Oh, that will never do!" cried Giant Atlas, with a great roar of
laughter. "I have not let fall so many stars within the last five
centuries. By the time you have stood there as long as I did, you will
begin to learn patience!"

"What!" shouted Hercules, very wrathfully, "do you intend to make me
bear this burden forever?"

"We will see about that, one of these days," answered the giant. "At all
events, you ought not to complain if you have to bear it the next
hundred years, or perhaps the next thousand. I bore it a good while
longer, in spite of the backache. Well, then, after a thousand years, if
I happen to feel in the mood, we may possibly shift about again. You are
certainly a very strong man, and can never have a better opportunity to
prove it. Posterity will talk of you, I warrant it!"

"Pish! a fig for its talk!" cried Hercules, with another hitch of his
shoulders. "Just take the sky upon your head one instant, will you? I
want to make a cushion of my lion's skin, for the weight to rest upon.
It really chafes me, and will cause unnecessary inconvenience in so many
centuries as I am to stand here."

"That's no more than fair, and I'll do it!" quoth the giant; for he had
no unkind feeling toward Hercules, and was merely acting with a too
selfish consideration of his own ease. "For just five minutes, then,
I'll take back the sky. Only for five minutes, recollect! I have no idea
of spending another thousand years as I spent the last. Variety is the
spice of life, say I."

Ah, the thick-witted old rogue of a giant! He threw down the golden
apples, and received back the sky from the head and shoulders of
Hercules, upon his own, where it rightly belonged. And Hercules picked
up the three golden apples, that were as big or bigger than pumpkins and
straightway set out on his journey homeward, without paying the
slightest heed to the thundering tones of the giant, who bellowed after
him to come back. Another forest sprang up around his feet, and grew
ancient there; and again might be seen oak trees, of six or seven
centuries old, that had waxed thus aged betwixt his enormous toes.

And there stands the giant to this day; or, at any rate, there stands a
mountain as tall as he, and which bears his name; and when the thunder
rumbles about its summit, we may imagine it to be the voice of Giant
Atlas, bellowing after Hercules!




CHAPTER II

THE POMEGRANATE SEEDS


Mother Ceres was exceedingly fond of her daughter Proserpina, and seldom
let her go alone into the fields. But, just at the time when my story
begins, the good lady was very busy, because she had the care of the
wheat, and the Indian corn, and the rye and barley, and, in short, of
the crops of every kind, all over the earth; and as the season had thus
far been uncommonly backward, it was necessary to make the harvest ripen
more speedily than usual. So she put on her turban, made of poppies (a
kind of flower which she was always noted for wearing) and got into her
car drawn by a pair of winged dragons, and was just ready to set off.

"Dear mother," said Proserpina, "I shall be very lonely while you are
away. May I not run down to the shore, and ask some of the sea nymphs to
come up out of the waves and play with me?"

"Yes, child," answered Mother Ceres. "The sea nymphs are good creatures,
and will never lead you into any harm. But you must take care not to
stray away from them, nor go wandering about the fields by yourself.
Young girls, without their mothers to take care of them, are very apt to
get into mischief."

The child promised to be as prudent as if she were a grown-up woman,
and, by the time the winged dragons had whirled the car out of sight,
she was already on the shore, calling to the sea nymphs to come and
play with her. They knew Proserpina's voice, and were not long in
showing their glistening faces and sea-green hair above the water, at
the bottom of which was their home. They brought along with them a great
many beautiful shells; and, sitting down on the moist sand, where the
surf wave broke over them, they busied themselves in making a necklace,
which they hung round Proserpina's neck. By way of showing her
gratitude, the child besought them to go with her a little way into the
fields, so that they might gather abundance of flowers, with which she
would make each of her kind playmates a wreath.

"Oh, no, dear Proserpina," cried the sea nymphs; "we dare not go with
you upon the dry land. We are apt to grow faint, unless at every breath
we can snuff up the salt breeze of the ocean. And don't you see how
careful we are to let the surf wave break over us every moment or two,
so as to keep ourselves comfortably moist? If it were not for that, we
should soon look like bunches of uprooted seaweed dried in the sun."

"It is a great pity," said Proserpina. "But do you wait for me here, and
I will run and gather my apron full of flowers, and be back again before
the surf wave has broken ten times over you. I long to make you some
wreaths that shall be as lovely as this necklace of many-coloured
shells."

"We will wait, then," answered the sea nymphs. "But while you are gone,
we may as well lie down on a bank of soft sponge, under the water. The
air to-day is a little too dry for our comfort. But we will pop up our
heads every few minutes to see if you are coming."

The young Proserpina ran quickly to a spot where, only the day before,
she had seen a great many flowers. These, however, were now a little
past their bloom; and wishing to give her friends the freshest and
loveliest blossoms, she strayed farther into the fields, and found some
that made her scream with delight. Never had she met with such exquisite
flowers before--violets, so large and fragrant--roses, with so rich and
delicate a blush--such superb hyacinths and such aromatic pinks--and
many others, some of which seemed to be of new shapes and colours. Two
or three times, moreover, she could not help thinking that a tuft of
most splendid flowers had suddenly sprouted out of the earth before her
very eyes, as if on purpose to tempt her a few steps farther.
Proserpina's apron was soon filled and brimming over with delightful
blossoms. She was on the point of turning back in order to rejoin the
sea nymphs, and sit with them on the moist sands, all twining wreaths
together. But, a little farther on, what should she behold? It was a
large shrub, completely covered with the most magnificent flowers in the
world.

"The darlings!" cried Proserpina; and then she thought to herself, "I
was looking at that spot only a moment ago. How strange it is that I did
not see the flowers!"

The nearer she approached the shrub, the more attractive it looked,
until she came quite close to it; and then, although its beauty was
richer than words can tell, she hardly knew whether to like it or not.
It bore above a hundred flowers of the most brilliant hues, and each
different from the others, but all having a kind of resemblance among
themselves, which showed them to be sister blossoms. But there was a
deep, glossy lustre on the leaves of the shrub, and on the petals of the
flowers, that made Proserpina doubt whether they might not be
poisonous. To tell you the truth, foolish as it may seem, she was half
inclined to turn round and run away.

"What a silly child I am!" thought she, taking courage. "It is really
the most beautiful shrub that ever sprang out of the earth. I will pull
it up by the roots, and carry it home, and plant it in my mother's
garden."

Holding up her apron full of flowers with her left hand, Proserpina
seized the large shrub with the other, and pulled and pulled, but was
hardly able to loosen the soil about its roots. What a deep-rooted plant
it was! Again the girl pulled with all her might, and observed that the
earth began to stir and crack to some distance around the stem. She gave
another pull, but relaxed her hold, fancying that there was a rumbling
sound right beneath her feet. Did the roots extend down into some
enchanted cavern? Then, laughing at herself for so childish a notion,
she made another effort; up came the shrub, and Proserpina staggered
back, holding the stem triumphantly in her hand, and gazing at the deep
hole which its roots had left in the soil.

Much to her astonishment, this hole kept spreading wider and wider, and
growing deeper and deeper, until it really seemed to have no bottom; and
all the while, there came a rumbling noise out of its depths, louder and
louder, and nearer and nearer, and sounding like the tramp of horses'
hoofs and the rattling of wheels. Too much frightened to run away, she
stood straining her eyes into this wonderful cavity, and soon saw a team
of four sable horses, snorting smoke out of their nostrils, and tearing
their way out of the earth with a splendid golden chariot whirling at
their heels. They leaped out of the bottomless hole, chariot and all;
and there they were, tossing their black manes, flourishing their black
tails, and curveting with every one of their hoofs off the ground at
once, close by the spot where Proserpina stood. In the chariot sat the
figure of a man, richly dressed, with a crown on his head, all flaming
with diamonds. He was of a noble aspect, and rather handsome, but looked
sullen and discontented; and he kept rubbing his eyes and shading them
with his hand, as if he did not live enough in the sunshine to be very
fond of its light.

As soon as this personage saw the affrighted Proserpina, he beckoned her
to come a little nearer.

"Do not be afraid," said he, with as cheerful a smile as he knew how to
put on. "Come! Will not you like to ride a little way with me, in my
beautiful chariot?"

But Proserpina was so alarmed that she wished for nothing but to get out
of his reach. And no wonder. The stranger did not look remarkably
good-natured, in spite of his smile; and as for his voice, its tones
were deep and stern, and sounded as much like the rumbling of an
earthquake under ground as anything else. As is always the case with
children in trouble, Proserpina's first thought was to call for her
mother.

"Mother, Mother Ceres!" cried she, all in a tremble. "Come quickly and
save me."

But her voice was too faint for her mother to hear. Indeed, it is most
probable that Ceres was then a thousand miles off, making the corn grow
in some far-distant country. Nor could it have availed her poor
daughter, even had she been within hearing; for no sooner did Proserpina
begin to cry out than the stranger leaped to the ground, caught the
child in his arms, and again mounting the chariot, shook the reins, and
shouted to the four black horses to set off. They immediately broke into
so swift a gallop that it seemed rather like flying through the air
than running along the earth. In a moment, Proserpina lost sight of the
pleasant vale of Enna, in which she had always dwelt. Another instant,
and even the summit of Mount Ætna had become so blue in the distance
that she could scarcely distinguish it from the smoke that gushed out of
its crater. But still the poor child screamed and scattered her apron
full of flowers along the way, and left a long cry trailing behind
the chariot; and many mothers, to whose ears it came, ran quickly to see
if any mischief had befallen their children. But Mother Ceres was a
great way off, and could not hear the cry.

As they rode on, the stranger did his best to soothe her.

"Why should you be so frightened, my pretty child?" said he, trying to
soften his rough voice. "I promise not to do you any harm. What! You
have been gathering flowers? Wait till we come to my palace, and I will
give you a garden full of prettier flowers than those, all made of
pearls, and diamonds, and rubies. Can you guess who I am? They call my
name Pluto, and I am the king of diamonds and all other precious stones.
Every atom of the gold and silver that lies under the earth belongs to
me, to say nothing of the copper and iron, and of the coal mines, which
supply me with abundance of fuel. Do you see this splendid crown upon my
head? You may have it for a plaything. Oh, we shall be very good
friends, and you will find me more agreeable than you expect, when once
we get out of this troublesome sunshine."

"Let me go home!" cried Proserpina--"let me go home!"

"My home is better than your mother's," answered King Pluto. "It is a
palace, all made of gold, with crystal windows; and because there is
little or no sunshine thereabouts, the apartments are illuminated with
diamond lamps. You never saw anything half so magnificent as my throne.
If you like, you may sit down on it, and be my little queen, and I will
sit on the footstool."

"I don't care for golden palaces and thrones," sobbed Proserpina. "Oh,
my mother, my mother! Carry me back to my mother!"

But King Pluto, as he called himself, only shouted to his steeds to go
faster.

"Pray do not be foolish, Proserpina," said he, in rather a sullen tone,
"I offer you my palace and my crown, and all the riches that are under
the earth; and you treat me as if I were doing you an injury. The one
thing which my palace needs is a merry little maid, to run up stairs and
down, and cheer up the rooms with her smile. And this is what you must
do for King Pluto."

"Never!" answered Proserpina, looking as miserable as she could. "I
shall never smile again till you set me down at my mother's door."

But she might just as well have talked to the wind that whistled past
them; for Pluto urged on his horses, and went faster than ever.
Proserpina continued to cry out, and screamed so long and so loudly that
her poor little voice was almost screamed away; and when it was nothing
but a whisper, she happened to cast her eyes over a great, broad field
of waving grain--and whom do you think she saw? Whom but Mother Ceres,
making the corn grow, and too busy to notice the golden chariot as it
went rattling along. The child mustered all her strength, and gave one
more scream, but was out of sight before Ceres had time to turn her
head.

King Pluto had taken a road which now began to grow excessively gloomy.
It was bordered on each side with rocks and precipices, between which
the rumbling of the chariot wheels was reverberated with a noise like
rolling thunder. The trees and bushes that grew in the crevices of the
rocks had very dismal foliage; and by and by, although it was hardly
noon, the air became obscured with a gray twilight. The black horses had
rushed along so swiftly that they were already beyond the limits of the
sunshine. But the duskier it grew, the more did Pluto's visage assume an
air of satisfaction. After all, he was not an ill-looking person,
especially when he left off twisting his features into a smile that did
not belong to them. Proserpina peeped at his face through the gathering
dusk, and hoped that he might not be so very wicked as she at first
thought him.

"Ah, this twilight is truly refreshing," said King Pluto, "after being
so tormented with that ugly and impertinent glare of the sun. How much
more agreeable is lamp-light or torchlight, more particularly when
reflected from diamonds! It will be a magnificent sight when we get to
my palace."

"Is it much farther?" asked Proserpina. "And will you carry me back when
I have seen it?"

"We will talk of that by and by," answered Pluto. "We are just entering
my dominions. Do you see that tall gateway before us? When we pass those
gates, we are at home. And there lies my faithful mastiff at the
threshold. Cerberus! Cerberus! Come hither, my good dog!"

So saying, Pluto pulled at the reins, and stopped the chariot right
between the tall, massive pillars of the gateway. The mastiff of which
he had spoken got up from the threshold and stood on his hinder legs, so
as to put his fore paws on the chariot wheel. But, my stars, what a
strange dog it was! Why, he was a big, rough, ugly-looking monster, with
three separate heads, and each of them fiercer than the two others; but,
fierce as they were, King Pluto patted them all. He seemed as fond of
his three-headed dog as if it had been a sweet little spaniel with
silken ears and curly hair. Cerberus, on the other hand, was evidently
rejoiced to see his master, and expressed his attachment, as other dogs
do, by wagging his tail at a great rate. Proserpina's eyes being drawn
to it by its brisk motion, she saw that this tail was neither more nor
less than a live dragon, with fiery eyes, and fangs that had a very
poisonous aspect. And while the three-headed Cerberus was fawning so
lovingly on King Pluto, there was the dragon tail wagging against its
will, and looking as cross and ill-natured as you can imagine, on its
own separate account.

"Will the dog bite me?" asked Proserpina, shrinking closer to Pluto.
"What an ugly creature he is!"

"Oh, never fear," answered her companion. "He never harms people, unless
they try to enter my dominions without being sent for, or to get away
when I wish to keep them here. Down, Cerberus! Now, my pretty
Proserpina, we will drive on."

On went the chariot, and King Pluto seemed greatly pleased to find
himself once more in his own kingdom. He drew Proserpina's attention to
the rich veins of gold that were to be seen among the rocks, and pointed
to several places where one stroke of a pickaxe would loosen a bushel of
diamonds. All along the road, indeed, there were sparkling gems which
would have been of inestimable value above ground, but which were here
reckoned of the meaner sort and hardly worth a beggar's stooping for.

Not far from the gateway they came to a bridge which seemed to be built
of iron, Pluto stopped the chariot, and bade Proserpina look at the
stream which was gliding so lazily beneath it. Never in her life had she
beheld so torpid, so black, so muddy looking a stream: its waters
reflected no images of anything that was on the banks, and it moved as
sluggishly as if it had quite forgotten which way it ought to flow, and
had rather stagnate than flow either one way or the other.

"This is the river Lethe," observed King Pluto. "Is it not a very
pleasant stream?"

"I think it a very dismal one," said Proserpina.

"It suits my taste, however," answered Pluto, who was apt to be sullen
when anybody disagreed with him. "At all events, its water has one very
excellent quality; for a single draught of it makes people forget every
care and sorrow that has hitherto tormented them. Only sip a little of
it, my dear Proserpina, and you will instantly cease to grieve for your
mother, and will have nothing in your memory that can prevent your being
perfectly happy in my palace. I will send for some, in a golden goblet,
the moment we arrive."

"Oh no, no, no!" cried Proserpina, weeping afresh. "I had a thousand
times rather be miserable with remembering my mother, than be happy in
forgetting her. That dear, dear mother! I never, never will forget her."

"We shall see," said King Pluto. "You do not know what fine times we
will have in my palace. Here we are just at the portal. These pillars
are solid gold, I assure you."

He alighted from the chariot, and taking Proserpina in his arms, carried
her up a lofty flight of steps into the great hall of the palace. It
was splendidly illuminated by means of large precious stones of various
hues, which seemed to burn like so many lamps and glowed with a
hundred-fold radiance all through the vast apartment. And yet there was
a kind of gloom in the midst of this enchanted light; nor was there a
single object in the hall that was really agreeable to behold, except
the little Proserpina herself, a lovely child, with one earthly flower
which she had not let fall from her hand. It is my opinion that even
King Pluto had never been happy in his palace, and that this was the
true reason why he had stolen away Proserpina, in order that he might
have something to love, instead of cheating his heart any longer with
this tiresome magnificence. And though he pretended to dislike the
sunshine of the upper world, yet the effect of the child's presence,
bedimmed as she was by her tears, was as if a faint and watery sunbeam
had somehow or other found its way into the enchanted hall.

Pluto now summoned his domestics, and bade them lose no time in
preparing a most sumptuous banquet, and above all things not to fail of
setting a golden beaker of the water of Lethe by Proserpina's plate.

"I will neither drink that nor anything else," said Proserpina. "Nor
will I taste a morsel of food, even if you keep me forever in your
palace."

"I should be sorry for that," replied King Pluto, patting her cheek; for
he really wished to be kind, if he had only known how. "You are a
spoiled child, I perceive, my little Proserpina; but when you see the
nice things which my cook will make for you, your appetite will quickly
come again."

Then, sending for the head cook, he gave strict orders that all sorts
of delicacies, such as young people are usually fond of, should be set
before Proserpina. He had a secret motive in this; for, you are to
understand, it is a fixed law that, when persons are carried off to the
land of magic, if they once taste any food there, they can never get
back to their friends. Now, if King Pluto had been cunning enough to
offer Proserpina some fruit, or bread and milk (which was the simple
fare to which the child had always been accustomed), it is very probable
that she would soon have been tempted to eat it. But he left the matter
entirely to his cook, who, like all other cooks, considered nothing fit
to eat unless it were rich pastry, or highly seasoned meat, or spiced
sweet cakes--things which Proserpina's mother had never given her, and
the smell of which quite took away her appetite, instead of sharpening
it.

But my story must now clamber out of King Pluto's dominions, and see
what Mother Ceres has been about since she was bereft of her daughter.
We had a glimpse of her, as you remember, half hidden among the waving
grain, while the four black steeds were swiftly whirling along the
chariot in which her beloved Proserpina was so unwillingly borne away.
You recollect, too, the loud scream which Proserpina gave, just when the
chariot was out of sight.

Of all the child's outcries, this last shriek was the only one that
reached the ears of Mother Ceres. She had mistaken the rumbling of the
chariot wheels for a peal of thunder, and imagined that a shower was
coming up, and that it would assist her in making the corn grow. But, at
the sound of Proserpina's shriek, she started, and looked about in every
direction, not knowing whence it came, but feeling almost certain that
it was her daughter's voice. It seemed so unaccountable, however, that
the girl should have strayed over so many lands and seas (which she
herself could not have traversed without the aid of her winged dragons),
that the good Ceres tried to believe that it must be the child of some
other parent, and not her own darling Proserpina who had uttered this
lamentable cry. Nevertheless, it troubled her with a vast many tender
fears, such as are ready to bestir themselves in every mother's heart,
when she finds it necessary to go away from her dear children without
leaving them under the care of some maiden aunt, or other such faithful
guardian. So she quickly left the field in which she had been so busy;
and, as her work was not half done, the grain looked, next day, as if it
needed both sun and rain, and as if it were blighted in the ear and had
something the matter with its roots.

The pair of dragons must have had very nimble wings; for, in less than
an hour, Mother Ceres had alighted at the door of her home and found it
empty. Knowing, however, that the child was fond of sporting on the
seashore, she hastened thither as fast as she could, and there beheld
the wet faces of the poor sea nymphs peeping over a wave. All this
while, the good creatures had been waiting on the bank of sponge, and,
once every half-minute or so, had popped up their four heads above
water, to see if their playmate were yet coming back. When they saw
Mother Ceres, they sat down on the crest of the surf wave, and let it
toss them ashore at her feet.

"Where is Proserpina?" cried Ceres. "Where is my child? Tell me, you
naughty sea nymphs, have you enticed her under the sea?"

"Oh, no, good Mother Ceres," said the innocent sea nymphs, tossing back
their green ringlets and looking her in the face. "We never should dream
of such a thing. Proserpina has been at play with us, it is true; but
she left us a long while ago, meaning only to run a little way upon the
dry land and gather some flowers for a wreath. This was early in the
day, and we have seen nothing of her since."

Ceres scarcely waited to hear what the nymphs had to say before she
hurried off to make inquiries all through the neighbourhood. But nobody
told her anything that could enable the poor mother to guess what had
become of Proserpina. A fisherman, it is true, had noticed her little
footprints in the sand, as he went homeward along the beach with a
basket of fish; a rustic had seen the child stooping to gather flowers;
several persons had heard either the rattling of chariot wheels or the
rumbling of distant thunder; and one old woman, while plucking vervain
and catnip, had heard a scream, but supposed it to be some childish
nonsense, and therefore did not take the trouble to look up. The stupid
people! It took them such a tedious while to tell the nothing that they
knew, that it was dark night before Mother Ceres found out that she must
seek her daughter elsewhere. So she lighted a torch, and set forth,
resolving never to come back until Proserpina was discovered.

In her haste and trouble of mind, she quite forgot her car and the
winged dragons; or, it may be, she thought that she could follow up the
search more thoroughly on foot. At all events, this was the way in which
she began her sorrowful journey, holding her torch before her, and
looking carefully at every object along the path. And as it happened,
she had not gone far before she found one of the magnificent flowers
which grew on the shrub that Proserpina had pulled up.

"Ha!" thought Mother Ceres, examining it by torchlight. "Here is
mischief in this flower! The earth did not produce it by any help of
mine, nor of its own accord. It is the work of enchantment, and is
therefore poisonous; and perhaps it has poisoned my poor child."

But she put the poisonous flower in her bosom, not knowing whether she
might ever find any other memorial of Proserpina.

All night long, at the door of every cottage and farmhouse, Ceres
knocked and called up the weary labourers to inquire if they had seen
her child; and they stood, gaping and half asleep, at the threshold, and
answered her pityingly, and besought her to come in and rest. At the
portal of every palace, too, she made so loud a summons that the menials
hurried to throw open the gate, thinking that it must be some great king
or queen, who would demand a banquet for supper and a stately chamber to
repose in. And when they saw only a sad and anxious woman, with a torch
in her hand and a wreath of withered poppies on her head, they spoke
rudely, and sometimes threatened to set the dogs upon her. But nobody
had seen Proserpina, nor could give Mother Ceres the least hint which
way to seek her. Thus passed the night; and still she continued her
search without sitting down to rest, or stopping to take food, or even
remembering to put out the torch; although first the rosy dawn, and then
the glad light of the morning sun, made its red flame look thin and
pale. But I wonder what sort of stuff this torch was made of; for it
burned dimly through the day, and, at night, was as bright as ever, and
never was extinguished by the rain or wind in all the weary days and
nights while Ceres was seeking for Proserpina.

It was not merely of human beings that she asked tidings of her
daughter. In the woods and by the streams she met creatures of another
nature, who used, in those old times, to haunt the pleasant and solitary
places, and were very sociable with persons who understood their
language and customs, as Mother Ceres did. Sometimes, for instance, she
tapped with her finger against the knotted trunk of a majestic oak; and
immediately its rude bark would cleave asunder, and forth would step a
beautiful maiden, who was the hamadryad of the oak, dwelling inside of
it, and sharing its long life, and rejoicing when its green leaves
sported with the breeze. But not one of these leafy damsels had seen
Proserpina. Then, going a little farther, Ceres would, perhaps, come to
a fountain gushing out of a pebbly hollow in the earth, and would dabble
with her hand in the water. Behold, up through its sandy and pebbly bed,
along with the fountain's gush, a young woman with dripping hair would
arise, and stand gazing at Mother Ceres, half out of the water, and
undulating up and down with its ever-restless motion. But when the
mother asked whether her poor lost child had stopped to drink out of the
fountain, the naiad, with weeping eyes (for these water nymphs had tears
to spare for everybody's grief), would answer, "No!" in a murmuring
voice, which was just like the murmur of the stream.

Often, likewise, she encountered fauns, who looked like sunburnt country
people, except that they had hairy ears, and little horns upon their
foreheads, and the hinder legs of goats, on which they gambolled merrily
about the woods and fields. They were a frolicsome kind of creature,
but grew as sad as their cheerful dispositions would allow when Ceres
inquired for her daughter, and they had no good news to tell. But
sometimes she came suddenly upon a rude gang of satyrs, who had faces
like monkeys and horses' tails behind them, and who were generally
dancing in a very boisterous manner, with shouts of noisy laughter. When
she stopped to question them, they would only laugh the louder and make
new merriment out of the lone woman's distress. How unkind of those ugly
satyrs! And once, while crossing a solitary sheep pasture, she saw a
personage named Pan, seated at the foot of a tall rock and making music
on a shepherd's flute. He, too, had horns, and hairy ears, and goat's
feet; but, being acquainted with Mother Ceres, he answered her question
as civilly as he knew how, and invited her to taste some milk and honey
out of a wooden bowl. But neither could Pan tell her what had become of
Proserpina, any better than the rest of these wild people.

And thus Mother Ceres went wandering about for nine long days and
nights, finding no trace of Proserpina, unless it were now and then a
withered flower; and these she picked up and put in her bosom, because
she fancied that they might have fallen from her poor child's hand. All
day she travelled onward through the hot sun; and at night, again, the
flame of the torch would redden and gleam along the pathway, and she
continued her search by its light, without ever sitting down to rest.

On the tenth day, she chanced to espy the mouth of a cavern, within
which (though it was bright noon everywhere else) there would have been
only a dusky twilight; but it so happened that a torch was burning
there. It flickered, and struggled with the duskiness, but could not
half light up the gloomy cavern with all its melancholy glimmer. Ceres
was resolved to leave no spot without a search; so she peeped into the
entrance of the cave, and lighted it up a little more by holding her own
torch before her. In so doing, she caught a glimpse of what seemed to be
a woman, sitting on the brown leaves of the last autumn, a great heap of
which had been swept into the cave by the wind. This woman (if woman it
were) was by no means so beautiful as many of her sex; for her head,
they tell me, was shaped very much like a dog's, and, by way of
ornament, she wore a wreath of snakes around it. But Mother Ceres, the
moment she saw her, knew that this was an odd kind of a person, who put
all her enjoyment in being miserable, and never would have a word to say
to other people, unless they were as melancholy and wretched as she
herself delighted to be.

"I am wretched enough now," thought poor Ceres, "to talk with this
melancholy Hecate, were she ten times sadder than ever she was yet."

So she stepped into the cave, and sat down on the withered leaves by the
dog-headed woman's side. In all the world, since her daughter's loss,
she had found no other companion.

"O Hecate," said she, "if ever you lose a daughter, you will know what
sorrow is. Tell me, for pity's sake, have you seen my poor child
Proserpina pass by the mouth of your cavern?"

"No," answered Hecate, in a cracked voice, and sighing betwixt every
word or two--"no, Mother Ceres, I have seen nothing of your daughter.
But my ears, you must know, are made in such a way that all cries of
distress and affright, all over the world, are pretty sure to find
their way to them; and nine days ago, as I sat in my cave, making myself
very miserable, I heard the voice of a young girl shrieking as if in
great distress. Something terrible has happened to the child, you may
rest assured. As well as I could judge, a dragon, or some other cruel
monster, was carrying her away."

"You kill me by saying so," cried Ceres, almost ready to faint. "Where
was the sound, and which way did it seem to go?"

"It passed very swiftly along," said Hecate, "and, at the same time,
there was a heavy rumbling of wheels toward the eastward. I can tell you
nothing more, except that, in my honest opinion, you will never see your
daughter again. The best advice I can give you is to take up your abode
in this cavern, where we will be the two most wretched women in the
world."

"Not yet, dark Hecate," replied Ceres. "But do you first come with your
torch, and help me to seek for my lost child. And when there shall be no
more hope of finding her (if that black day is ordained to come), then,
if you will give me room to fling myself down, either on these withered
leaves or on the naked rock, I will show you what it is to be miserable.
But, until I know that she has perished from the face of the earth, I
will not allow myself space even to grieve."

The dismal Hecate did not much like the idea of going abroad into the
sunny world. But then she reflected that the sorrow of the disconsolate
Ceres would be like a gloomy twilight round about them both, let the sun
shine ever so brightly, and that therefore she might enjoy her bad
spirits quite as well as if she were to stay in the cave. So she finally
consented to go, and they set out together, both carrying torches,
although it was broad daylight and clear sunshine. The torchlight
seemed to make a gloom; so that the people whom they met along the road
could not very distinctly see their figures; and, indeed, if they once
caught a glimpse of Hecate, with the wreath of snakes round her
forehead, they generally thought it prudent to run away without waiting
for a second glance.

As the pair travelled along in this woebegone manner, a thought struck
Ceres.

"There is one person," she exclaimed, "who must have seen my poor child,
and can doubtless tell what has become of her. Why did not I think of
him before? It is Phœbus."

"What," said Hecate, "the young man that always sits in the sunshine?
Oh, pray do not think of going near him. He is a gay, light, frivolous
young fellow, and will only smile in your face. And besides, there is
such a glare of the sun about him that he will quite blind my poor eyes,
which I have almost wept away already."

"You have promised to be my companion," answered Ceres. "Come, let us
make haste, or the sunshine will be gone, and Phœbus along with it."

Accordingly, they went along in quest of Phœbus, both of them sighing
grievously, and Hecate, to say the truth, making a great deal worse
lamentation than Ceres; for all the pleasure she had, you know, lay in
being miserable, and therefore she made the most of it. By and by, after
a pretty long journey, they arrived at the sunniest spot in the whole
world. There they beheld a beautiful young man, with long, curling
ringlets, which seemed to be made of golden sunbeams; his garments were
like light summer clouds; and the expression of his face was so
exceedingly vivid that Hecate held her hands before her eyes, muttering
that he ought to wear a black veil. Phœbus (for this was the very
person whom they were seeking) had a lyre in his hands, and was making
its chords tremble with sweet music; at the same time singing a most
exquisite song, which he had recently composed. For, besides a great
many other accomplishments, this young man was renowned for his
admirable poetry.

As Ceres and her dismal companion approached him, Phœbus smiled on
them so cheerfully that Hecate's wreath of snakes gave a spiteful hiss,
and Hecate heartily wished herself back in her cave. But as for Ceres,
she was too earnest in her grief either to know or care whether
Phœbus smiled or frowned.

"Phœbus!" exclaimed she, "I am in great trouble, and have come to you
for assistance. Can you tell me what has become of my dear child
Proserpina?"

"Proserpina! Proserpina, did you call her name?" answered Phœbus,
endeavouring to recollect; for there was such a continual flow of
pleasant ideas in his mind that he was apt to forget what had happened
no longer ago than yesterday. "Ah, yes, I remember her now. A very
lovely child, indeed. I am happy to tell you, my dear madam, that I did
see the little Proserpina not many days ago. You may make yourself
perfectly easy about her. She is safe, and in excellent hands."

"Oh, where is my dear child?" cried Ceres, clasping her hands and
flinging herself at his feet.

"Why," said Phœbus--and as he spoke, he kept touching his lyre so as
to make a thread of music run in and out among his words--"as the little
damsel was gathering flowers (and she has really a very exquisite taste
for flowers) she was suddenly snatched up by King Pluto and carried off
to his dominions. I have never been in that part of the universe; but
the royal palace, I am told, is built in a very noble style of
architecture, and of the most splendid and costly materials. Gold,
diamonds, pearls, and all manner of precious stones will be your
daughter's ordinary playthings. I recommend to you, my dear lady, to
give yourself no uneasiness. Proserpina's sense of beauty will be duly
gratified, and, even in spite of the lack of sunshine, she will lead a
very enviable life."

"Hush! Say not such a word!" answered Ceres, indignantly. "What is there
to gratify her heart? What are all the splendours you speak of, without
affection? I must have her back again. Will you go with me, Phœbus,
to demand my daughter of this wicked Pluto?"

"Pray excuse me," replied Phœbus, with an elegant obeisance. "I
certainly wish you success, and regret that my own affairs are so
immediately pressing that I cannot have the pleasure of attending you.
Besides, I am not upon the best of terms with King Pluto. To tell you
the truth, his three-headed mastiff would never let me pass the gateway;
for I should be compelled to take a sheaf of sunbeams along with me, and
those, you know, are forbidden things in Pluto's kingdom."

"Ah, Phœbus," said Ceres, with bitter meaning in her words, "you have
a harp instead of a heart. Farewell."

"Will not you stay a moment," asked Phœbus, "and hear me turn the
pretty and touching story of Proserpina into extemporary verses?"

But Ceres shook her head, and hastened away, along with Hecate.
Phœbus (who, as I have told you, was an exquisite poet) forthwith
began to make an ode about the poor mother's grief; and, if we were to
judge of his sensibility by this beautiful production, he must have
been endowed with a very tender heart. But when a poet gets into the
habit of using his heartstrings to make chords for his lyre, he may
thrum upon them as much as he will, without any great pain to himself.
Accordingly, though Phœbus sang a very sad song, he was as merry all
the while as were the sunbeams amid which he dwelt.

Poor Mother Ceres had now found out what had become of her daughter, but
was not a whit happier than before. Her case, on the contrary, looked
more desperate than ever. As long as Proserpina was above ground there
might have been hopes of regaining her. But now, that the poor child was
shut up within the iron gates of the king of the mines, at the threshold
of which lay the three-headed Cerberus, there seemed no possibility of
her ever making her escape. The dismal Hecate, who loved to take the
darkest view of things, told Ceres that she had better come with her to
the cavern, and spend the rest of her life in being miserable. Ceres
answered that Hecate was welcome to go back thither herself, but that,
for her part, she would wander about the earth in quest of the entrance
to King Pluto's dominions. And Hecate took her at her word, and hurried
back to her beloved cave, frightening a great many little children with
a glimpse of her dog's face as she went.

Poor Mother Ceres! It is melancholy to think of her, pursuing her
toilsome way all alone, and holding up that never-dying torch, the flame
of which seemed an emblem of the grief and hope that burned together in
her heart. So much did she suffer that, though her aspect had been quite
youthful when her troubles began, she grew to look like an elderly
person in a very brief time. She cared not how she was dressed, nor had
she ever thought of flinging away the wreath of withered poppies which
she put on the very morning of Proserpina's disappearance. She roamed
about in so wild a way, and with her hair so dishevelled, that people
took her for some distracted creature, and never dreamed that this was
Mother Ceres, who had the oversight of every seed which the husband-man
planted. Nowadays, however, she gave herself no trouble about seed time
nor harvest, but left the farmers to take care of their own affairs, and
the crops to fade or flourish, as the case might be. There was nothing,
now, in which Ceres seemed to feel an interest, unless when she saw
children at play, or gathering flowers along the wayside. Then, indeed,
she would stand and gaze at them with tears in her eyes. The children,
too, appeared to have a sympathy with her grief, and would cluster
themselves in a little group about her knees, and look up wistfully in
her face; and Ceres, after giving them a kiss all round, would lead them
to their homes, and advise their mothers never to let them stray out of
sight.

"For if they do," said she, "it may happen to you, as it has to me, that
the iron-hearted King Pluto will take a liking to your darlings, and
snatch them up in his chariot, and carry them away."

One day, during her pilgrimage in quest of the entrance to Pluto's
kingdom, she came to the palace of King Celeus, who reigned at Eleusis.
Ascending a lofty flight of steps, she entered the portal, and found the
royal household in very great alarm about the queen's baby. The infant,
it seems, was sickly (being troubled with its teeth, I suppose), and
would take no food, and was all the time moaning with pain. The
queen--her name was Metanira--was desirous of finding a nurse; and when
she beheld a woman of matronly aspect coming up the palace steps, she
thought, in her own mind, that here was the very person whom she needed.
So Queen Metanira ran to the door, with the poor wailing baby in her
arms, and besought Ceres to take charge of it, or, at least, to tell her
what would do it good.

"Will you trust the child entirely to me?" asked Ceres.

"Yes, and gladly, too," answered the queen, "if you will devote all your
time to him. For I can see that you have been a mother."

"You are right," said Ceres. "I once had a child of my own. Well; I will
be the nurse of this poor, sickly boy. But beware, I warn you, that you
do not interfere with any kind of treatment which I may judge proper for
him. If you do so, the poor infant must suffer for his mother's folly."

Then she kissed the child, and it seemed to do him good; for he smiled
and nestled closely into her bosom.

So Mother Ceres set her torch in a corner (where it kept burning all the
while), and took up her abode in the palace of King Celeus, as nurse to
the little Prince Demophoön. She treated him as if he were her own
child, and allowed neither the king nor the queen to say whether he
should be bathed in warm or cold water, or what he should eat, or how
often he should take the air, or when he should be put to bed. You would
hardly believe me, if I were to tell how quickly the baby prince got rid
of his ailments, and grew fat, and rosy, and strong, and how he had two
rows of ivory teeth in less time than any other little fellow, before or
since. Instead of the palest, and wretchedest, and puniest imp in the
world (as his own mother confessed him to be when Ceres first took him
in charge), he was now a strapping baby, crowing, laughing, kicking up
his heels, and rolling from one end of the room to the other. All the
good women of the neighbourhood crowded to the palace, and held up their
hands, in unutterable amazement, at the beauty and wholesomeness of this
darling little prince. Their wonder was the greater, because he was
never seen to taste any food; not even so much as a cup of milk.

"Pray, nurse," the queen kept saying, "how is it that you make the child
thrive so?"

"I was a mother once," Ceres always replied; "and having nursed my own
child, I know what other children need."

But Queen Metanira, as was very natural, had a great curiosity to know
precisely what the nurse did to her child. One night, therefore, she hid
herself in the chamber where Ceres and the little prince were accustomed
to sleep. There was a fire in the chimney, and it had now crumbled into
great coals and embers, which lay glowing on the hearth, with a blaze
flickering up now and then, and flinging a warm and ruddy light upon the
walls. Ceres sat before the hearth with the child in her lap, and the
fire-light making her shadow dance upon the ceiling overhead. She
undressed the little prince, and bathed him all over with some fragrant
liquid out of a vase. The next thing she did was to rake back the red
embers, and make a hollow place among them, just where the backlog had
been. At last, while the baby was crowing, and clapping its fat little
hands, and laughing in the nurse's face (just as you may have seen your
little brother or sister do before going into its warm bath), Ceres
suddenly laid him, all naked as he was, in the hollow among the red-hot
embers. She then raked the ashes over him, and turned quietly away.

You may imagine, if you can, how Queen Metanira shrieked, thinking
nothing less than that her dear child would be burned to a cinder. She
burst forth from her hiding place, and running to the hearth, raked open
the fire, and snatched up poor little Prince Demophoön out of his bed of
live coals, one of which he was griping in each of his fists. He
immediately set up a grievous cry, as babies are apt to do when rudely
startled out of a sound sleep. To the queen's astonishment and joy, she
could perceive no token of the child's being injured by the hot fire in
which he had lain. She now turned to Mother Ceres, and asked her to
explain the mystery.

"Foolish woman," answered Ceres, "did you not promise to intrust this
poor infant entirely to me? You little know the mischief you have done
him. Had you left him to my care, he would have grown up like a child of
celestial birth, endowed with superhuman strength and intelligence, and
would have lived forever. Do you imagine that earthly children are to
become immortal without being tempered to it in the fiercest heat of the
fire? But you have ruined your own son. For though he will be a strong
man and a hero in his day, yet, on account of your folly, he will grow
old, and finally die, like the sons of other women. The weak tenderness
of his mother has cost the poor boy an immortality. Farewell."

Saying these words, she kissed the little Prince Demophoön, and sighed
to think what he had lost, and took her departure without heeding Queen
Metanira, who entreated her to remain, and cover up the child among the
hot embers as often as she pleased. Poor baby! He never slept so warmly
again.

While she dwelt in the king's palace, Mother Ceres had been so
continually occupied with taking care of the young prince that her
heart was a little lightened of its grief for Proserpina. But now,
having nothing else to busy herself about, she became just as wretched
as before. At length, in her despair, she came to the dreadful
resolution that not a stalk of grain, nor a blade of grass, not a
potato, nor a turnip, nor any other vegetable that was good for man or
beast to eat, should be suffered to grow until her daughter were
restored. She even forbade the flowers to bloom, lest somebody's heart
should be cheered by their beauty.

Now, as not so much as a head of asparagus ever presumed to poke itself
out of the ground without the especial permission of Ceres, you may
conceive what a terrible calamity had here fallen upon the earth. The
husbandmen ploughed and planted as usual; but there lay the rich black
furrows, all as barren as a desert of sand. The pastures looked as brown
in the sweet month of June as ever they did in chill November. The rich
man's broad acres and the cottager's small garden patch were equally
blighted. Every little girl's flower bed showed nothing but dry stalks.
The old people shook their white heads, and said that the earth had
grown aged like themselves, and was no longer capable of wearing the
warm smile of summer on its face. It was really piteous to see the poor,
starving cattle and sheep, how they followed behind Ceres, lowing and
bleating, as if their instinct taught them to expect help from her; and
everybody that was acquainted with her power besought her to have mercy
on the human race, and, at all events, to let the grass grow. But Mother
Ceres, though naturally of an affectionate disposition, was now
inexorable.

"Never," said she. "If the earth is ever again to see any verdure, it
must first grow along the path which my daughter will tread in coming
back to me."

Finally, as there seemed to be no other remedy, our old friend
Quicksilver was sent post haste to King Pluto, in hopes that he might be
persuaded to undo the mischief he had done, and to set everything right
again by giving up Proserpina. Quicksilver accordingly made the best of
his way to the great gate, took a flying leap right over the
three-headed mastiff, and stood at the door of the palace in an
inconceivably short time. The servants knew him both by his face and
garb; for his short cloak, and his winged cap and shoes, and his snaky
staff had often been seen thereabouts in times gone by. He requested to
be shown immediately into the king's presence; and Pluto, who heard his
voice from the top of the stairs, and who loved to recreate himself with
Quicksilver's merry talk, called out to him to come up. And while they
settle their business together, we must inquire what Proserpina has been
doing ever since we saw her last.

The child had declared, as you may remember, that she would not taste a
mouthful of food as long as she should be compelled to remain in King
Pluto's palace. How she contrived to maintain her resolution, and at the
same time to keep herself tolerably plump and rosy is more than I can
explain; but some young ladies, I am given to understand, possess the
faculty of living on air, and Proserpina seems to have possessed it too.
At any rate, it was now six months since she left the outside of the
earth; and not a morsel, so far as the attendants were able to testify,
had yet passed between her teeth. This was the more creditable to
Proserpina, inasmuch as King Pluto had caused her to be tempted day
after day with all manner of sweetmeats, and richly preserved fruits,
and delicacies of every sort, such as young people are generally most
fond of. But her good mother had often told her of the hurtfulness of
these things; and for that reason alone, if there had been no other, she
would have resolutely refused to taste them.

All this time, being of a cheerful and active disposition, the little
damsel was not quite so unhappy as you may have supposed. The immense
palace had a thousand rooms, and was full of beautiful and wonderful
objects. There was a never-ceasing gloom, it is true, which half hid
itself among the innumerable pillars, gliding before the child as she
wandered among them, and treading stealthily behind her in the echo of
her footsteps. Neither was all the dazzle of the precious stones, which
flamed with their own light, worth one gleam of natural sunshine; nor
could the most brilliant of the many-coloured gems, which Proserpina had
for playthings, vie with the simple beauty of the flowers she used to
gather. But still, wherever the girl went, among those gilded halls and
chambers, it seemed as if she carried nature and sunshine along with
her, and as if she scattered dewy blossoms on her right hand and on her
left. After Proserpina came, the palace was no longer the same abode of
stately artifice and dismal magnificence that it had before been. The
inhabitants all felt this, and King Pluto more than any of them.

"My own little Proserpina," he used to say, "I wish you could like me a
little better. We gloomy and cloudy-natured persons have often as warm
hearts at bottom as those of a more cheerful character. If you would
only stay with me of your own accord, it would make me happier than the
possession of a hundred such palaces as this."

"Ah," said Proserpina, "you should have tried to make me like you before
carrying me off. And the best thing you can do now is to let me go
again. Then I might remember you sometimes, and think that you were as
kind as you knew how to be. Perhaps, too, one day or other, I might come
back, and pay you a visit."

"No, no," answered Pluto, with his gloomy smile, "I will not trust you
for that. You are too fond of living in the broad daylight, and
gathering flowers. What an idle and childish taste that is! Are not
these gems, which I have ordered to be dug for you, and which are richer
than any in my crown--are they not prettier than a violet?"

"Not half so pretty," said Proserpina, snatching the gems from Pluto's
hand, and flinging them to the other end of the hall. "Oh, my sweet
violets, shall I never see you again?"

And then she burst into tears. But young people's tears have very little
saltness or acidity in them, and do not inflame the eyes so much as
those of grown persons; so that it is not to be wondered at if, a few
moments afterward, Proserpina was sporting through the hall almost as
merrily as she and the four sea nymphs had sported along the edge of the
surf wave. King Pluto gazed after her, and wished that he, too, was a
child. And little Proserpina, when she turned about and beheld this
great king standing in his splendid hall, and looking so grand, and so
melancholy, and so lonesome, was smitten with a kind of pity. She ran
back to him, and, for the first time in all her life, put her small soft
hand in his.

"I love you a little," whispered she, looking up in his face.

"Do you, indeed, my dear child?" cried Pluto, bending his dark face down
to kiss her; but Proserpina shrank away from the kiss, for though his
features were noble, they were very dusky and grim. "Well, I have not
deserved it of you, after keeping you a prisoner for so many months, and
starving you, besides. Are you not terribly hungry? Is there nothing
which I can get you to eat?"

In asking this question, the king of the mines had a very cunning
purpose; for, you will recollect, if Proserpina tasted a morsel of food
in his dominions, she would never afterward be at liberty to quit them.

"No, indeed," said Proserpina. "Your head cook is always baking, and
stewing, and roasting, and rolling out paste, and contriving one dish or
another, which he imagines may be to my liking. But he might just as
well save himself the trouble, poor, fat little man that he is. I have
no appetite for anything in the world, unless it were a slice of bread
of my mother's own baking, or a little fruit out of her garden."

When Pluto heard this, he began to see that he had mistaken the best
method of tempting Proserpina to eat. The cook's made dishes and
artificial dainties were not half so delicious in the good child's
opinion as the simple fare to which Mother Ceres had accustomed her.
Wondering that he had never thought of it before, the king now sent one
of his trusty attendants, with a large basket, to get some of the finest
and juiciest pears, peaches and plums which could anywhere be found in
the upper world. Unfortunately, however, this was during the time when
Ceres had forbidden any fruits or vegetables to grow; and, after seeking
all over the earth, King Pluto's servant found only a single
pomegranate, and that so dried up as to be not worth eating.
Nevertheless, since there was no better to be had, he brought this dry,
old, withered pomegranate home to the palace, put it on a magnificent
golden salver, and carried it up to Proserpina. Now it happened,
curiously enough, that, just as the servant was bringing the pomegranate
into the back door of the palace, our friend Quicksilver had gone up the
front steps, on his errand to get Proserpina away from King Pluto.

As soon as Proserpina saw the pomegranate on the golden salver, she told
the servant he had better take it away again.

"I shall not touch it, I assure you," said she. "If I were ever so
hungry, I should never think of eating such a miserable, dry pomegranate
as that."

"It is the only one in the world," said the servant. He set down the
golden salver, with the wizened pomegranate upon it, and left the room.
When he was gone, Proserpina could not help coming close to the table,
and looking at this poor specimen of dried fruit with a great deal of
eagerness; for, to say the truth, on seeing something that suited her
taste, she felt all the six months' appetite taking possession of her at
once. To be sure, it was a very wretched looking pomegranate, and seemed
to have no more juice in it than an oyster shell. But there was no
choice of such things in King Pluto's palace. This was the first fruit
she had seen there, and the last she was ever likely to see; and unless
she ate it up immediately, it would grow drier than it already was, and
be wholly unfit to eat.

"At least, I may smell it," thought Proserpina.

So she took up the pomegranate, and applied it to her nose; and, somehow
or other, being in such close neighbourhood to her mouth, the fruit
found its way into that little red cave. Dear me! what an everlasting
pity! Before Proserpina knew what she was about, her teeth had actually
bitten it, of their own accord. Just as this fatal deed was done, the
door of the apartment opened, and in came King Pluto, followed by
Quicksilver, who had been urging him to let his little prisoner go. At
the first noise of their entrance, Proserpina withdrew the pomegranate
from her mouth. But Quicksilver (whose eyes were very keen, and his wits
the sharpest that ever anybody had) perceived that the child was a
little confused; and seeing the empty salver, he suspected that she had
been taking a sly nibble of something or other. As for honest Pluto, he
never guessed at the secret.

"My little Proserpina," said the king, sitting down, and affectionately
drawing her between his knees, "here is Quicksilver, who tells me that a
great many misfortunes have befallen innocent people on account of my
detaining you in my dominions. To confess the truth, I myself had
already reflected that it was an unjustifiable act to take you away from
your good mother. But, then, you must consider, my dear child, that this
vast palace is apt to be gloomy (although the precious stones certainly
shine very bright), and that I am not of the most cheerful disposition,
and that therefore it was a natural thing enough to seek for the society
of some merrier creature than myself. I hoped you would take my crown
for a plaything, and me--ah, you laugh, naughty Proserpina--me, grim as
I am, for a playmate. It was a silly expectation."

"Not so extremely silly," whispered Proserpina. "You have really amused
me very much, sometimes."

"Thank you," said King Pluto, rather dryly. "But I can see, plainly
enough, that you think my palace a dusky prison, and me the iron-hearted
keeper of it. And an iron heart I should surely have, if I could detain
you here any longer, my poor child, when it is now six months since you
tasted food. I give you your liberty. Go with Quicksilver. Hasten home
to your dear mother."

Now, although you may not have supposed it, Proserpina found it
impossible to take leave of poor King Pluto without some regrets, and a
good deal of compunction for not telling him about the pomegranate. She
even shed a tear or two, thinking how lonely and cheerless the great
palace would seem to him, with all its ugly glare of artificial light,
after she herself--his one little ray of natural sunshine, whom he had
stolen, to be sure, but only because he valued her so much--after she
should have departed. I know not how many kind things she might have
said to the disconsolate king of the mines, had not Quicksilver hurried
her away.

"Come along quickly," whispered he in her ear, "or His Majesty may
change his royal mind. And take care, above all things, that you say
nothing of what was brought you on the golden salver."

In a very short time they had passed the great gateway (leaving the
three-headed Cerberus barking, and yelping, and growling, with threefold
din, behind them), and emerged upon the surface of the earth. It was
delightful to behold, as Proserpina hastened along, how the path grew
verdant behind and on either side of her. Wherever she set her blessed
foot, there was at once a dewy flower. The violets gushed up along the
wayside. The grass and the grain began to sprout with tenfold vigour
and luxuriance, to make up for the dreary months that had been wasted in
barrenness. The starved cattle immediately set to work grazing, after
their long fast, and ate enormously all day, and got up at midnight to
eat more. But I can assure you it was a busy time of year with the
farmers, when they found the summer coming upon them with such a rush.
Nor must I forget to say that all the birds in the whole world hopped
about upon the newly blossoming trees, and sang together in a prodigious
ecstasy of joy.

Mother Ceres had returned to her deserted home, and was sitting
disconsolately on the doorstep, with her torch burning in her hand. She
had been idly watching the flame for some moments past, when all at once
it flickered and went out.

"What does this mean?" thought she. "It was an enchanted torch, and
should have kept burning till my child came back."

Lifting her eyes, she was surprised to see a sudden verdure flashing
over the brown and barren fields, exactly as you may have observed a
golden hue gleaming far and wide across the landscape, from the just
risen sun.

"Does the earth disobey me?" exclaimed Mother Ceres, indignantly. "Does
it presume to be green, when I have bidden it be barren, until my
daughter shall be restored to my arms?"

"Then open your arms, dear mother," cried a well-known voice, "and take
your little daughter into them."

And Proserpina came running, and flung herself upon her mother's bosom.
Their mutual transport is not to be described. The grief of their
separation had caused both of them to shed a great many tears; and now
they shed a great many more, because their joy could not so well express
itself in any other way.

When their hearts had grown a little more quiet, Mother Ceres looked
anxiously at Proserpina.

"My child," said she, "did you taste any food while you were in King
Pluto's palace?"

"Dearest mother," answered Proserpina, "I will tell you the whole truth.
Until this very morning, not a morsel of food had passed my lips. But
to-day, they brought me a pomegranate (a very dry one it was, and all
shrivelled up, till there was little left of it but seeds and skin), and
having seen no fruit for so long a time, and being faint with hunger, I
was tempted just to bite it. The instant I tasted it, King Pluto and
Quicksilver came into the room. I had not swallowed a morsel; but--dear
mother, I hope it was no harm--but six of the pomegranate seeds, I am
afraid, remained in my mouth."

"Ah, unfortunate child, and miserable me!" exclaimed Ceres. "For each of
those six pomegranate seeds you must spend one month of every year in
King Pluto's palace. You are but half restored to your mother. Only six
months with me, and six with that good-for-nothing King of Darkness!"

"Do not speak so harshly of poor King Pluto," said Proserpina, kissing
her mother. "He has some very good qualities; and I really think I can
bear to spend six months in his palace, if he will only let me spend the
other six with you. He certainly did very wrong to carry me off; but
then, as he says, it was but a dismal sort of life for him, to live in
that great gloomy place, all alone; and it has made a wonderful change
in his spirits to have a little girl to run up stairs and down. There
is some comfort in making him so happy; and so, upon the whole, dearest
mother, let us be thankful that he is not to keep me the whole year
round."




CHAPTER III

THE CHIMÆRA


Once, in the old, old times (for all the strange things which I tell you
about happened long before anybody can remember), a fountain gushed out
of a hillside, in the marvellous land of Greece. And, for aught I know,
after so many thousand years, it is still gushing out of the very
selfsame spot. At any rate, there was the pleasant fountain, welling
freshly forth and sparkling adown the hillside, in the golden sunset,
when a handsome young man named Bellerophon drew near its margin. In his
hand he held a bridle, studded with brilliant gems, and adorned with a
golden bit. Seeing an old man, and another of middle age, and a little
boy, near the fountain, and likewise a maiden, who was dipping up some
of the water in a pitcher, he paused, and begged that he might refresh
himself with a draught.

"This is very delicious water," he said to the maiden as he rinsed and
filled her pitcher, after drinking out of it. "Will you be kind enough
to tell me whether the fountain has any name?"

"Yes; it is called the Fountain of Pirene," answered the maiden; and
then she added, "My grandmother has told me that this clear fountain was
once a beautiful woman; and when her son was killed by the arrows of the
huntress Diana, she melted all away into tears. And so the water, which
you find so cool and sweet, is the sorrow of that poor mother's heart!"

"I should not have dreamed," observed the young stranger, "that so clear
a well-spring, with its gush and gurgle, and its cheery dance out of the
shade into the sunlight, had so much as one tear-drop in its bosom! And
this, then, is Pirene? I thank you, pretty maiden, for telling me its
name. I have come from a far-away country to find this very spot."

A middle-aged country fellow (he had driven his cow to drink out of the
spring) stared hard at young Bellerophon, and at the handsome bridle
which he carried in his hand.

"The watercourses must be getting low, friend, in your part of the
world," remarked he, "if you come so far only to find the Fountain of
Pirene. But, pray, have you lost a horse? I see you carry the bridle in
your hand; and a very pretty one it is with that double row of bright
stones upon it. If the horse was as fine as the bridle, you are much to
be pitied for losing him."

"I have lost no horse," said Bellerophon, with a smile. "But I happen to
be seeking a very famous one, which, as wise people have informed me,
must be found hereabouts, if anywhere. Do you know whether the winged
horse Pegasus still haunts the Fountain of Pirene, as he used to do in
your forefathers' days?"

But then the country fellow laughed.

Some of you, my little friends, have probably heard that this Pegasus
was a snow-white steed, with beautiful silvery wings, who spent most of
his time on the summit of Mount Helicon. He was as wild, and as swift,
and as buoyant, in his flight through the air, as any eagle that ever
soared into the clouds. There was nothing else like him in the world.
He had no mate; he never had been backed or bridled by a master; and,
for many a long year, he led a solitary and a happy life.

Oh, how fine a thing it is to be a winged horse! Sleeping at night, as
he did, on a lofty mountain-top, and passing the greater part of the day
in the air, Pegasus seemed hardly to be a creature of the earth.
Whenever he was seen, up very high above people's heads, with the
sunshine on his silvery wings, you would have thought that he belonged
to the sky, and that, skimming a little too low, he had got astray among
our mists and vapours, and was seeking his way back again. It was very
pretty to behold him plunge into the fleecy bosom of a bright cloud, and
be lost in it, for a moment or two, and then break forth from the other
side. Or, in a sullen rain storm, when there was a gray pavement of
clouds over the whole sky, it would sometimes happen that the winged
horse descended right through it, and the glad light of the upper region
would gleam after him. In another instant, it is true, both Pegasus and
the pleasant light would be gone away together. But anyone that was
fortunate enough to see this wondrous spectacle felt cheerful the whole
day afterward, and as much longer as the storm lasted.

In the summer time, and in the beautifullest of weather, Pegasus often
alighted on the solid earth, and, closing his silvery wings, would
gallop over hill and dale for pastime, as fleetly as the wind. Oftener
than in any other place, he had been seen near the Fountain of Pirene,
drinking the delicious water, or rolling himself upon the soft grass of
the margin. Sometimes, too (but Pegasus was very dainty in his food), he
would crop a few of the clover blossoms that happened to be sweetest.

To the Fountain of Pirene, therefore, people's great-grandfathers had
been in the habit of going (as long as they were youthful and retained
their faith in winged horses), in hopes of getting a glimpse at the
beautiful Pegasus. But, of late years, he had been very seldom seen.
Indeed, there were many of the country folks, dwelling within half an
hour's walk of the fountain, who had never beheld Pegasus, and did not
believe that there was any such creature in existence. The country
fellow to whom Bellerophon was speaking chanced to be one of those
incredulous persons.

And that was the reason why he laughed.

"Pegasus, indeed!" cried he, turning up his nose as high as such a flat
nose could be turned up--"Pegasus, indeed! A winged horse, truly! Why,
friend, are you in your senses? Of what use would wings be to a horse?
Could he drag the plough so well, think you? To be sure, there might be
a little saving in the expense of shoes; but then, how would a man like
to see his horse flying out of the stable window?--yes, or whisking him
up above the clouds, when he only wanted to ride to mill? No, no! I
don't believe in Pegasus. There never was such a ridiculous kind of a
horse fowl made!"

"I have some reason to think otherwise," said Bellerophon, quietly.

And then he turned to an old, gray man, who was leaning on a staff, and
listening very attentively, with his head stretched forward and one hand
at his ear, because, for the last twenty years, he had been getting
rather deaf.

"And what say you, venerable sir?" inquired he, "In your younger days, I
should imagine, you must frequently have seen the winged steed!"

"Ah, young stranger, my memory is very poor!" said the aged man. "When I
was a lad, if I remember rightly, I used to believe there was such a
horse, and so did everybody else. But, nowadays, I hardly know what to
think, and very seldom think about the winged horse at all. If I ever
saw the creature, it was a long, long while ago; and, to tell you the
truth, I doubt whether I ever did see him. One day, to be sure, when I
was quite a youth, I remember seeing some hoof tramps round about the
brink of the fountain. Pegasus might have made those hoof marks; and so
might some other horse."

"And have you never seen him, my fair maiden?" asked Bellerophon of the
girl, who stood with the pitcher on her head, while this talk went on.
"You certainly could see Pegasus, if anybody can, for your eyes are very
bright."

"Once I thought I saw him," replied the maiden, with a smile and a
blush. "It was either Pegasus or a large white bird, a very great way up
in the air. And one other time, as I was coming to the fountain with my
pitcher, I heard a neigh. Oh, such a brisk and melodious neigh as that
was! My very heart leaped with delight at the sound. But it startled me,
nevertheless; so that I ran home without filling my pitcher."

"That was truly a pity!" said Bellerophon.

And he turned to the child, whom I mentioned at the beginning of the
story, and who was gazing at him, as children are apt to gaze at
strangers, with his rosy mouth wide open.

"Well, my little fellow," cried Bellerophon, playfully pulling one of
his curls, "I suppose you have often seen the winged horse."

"That I have," answered the child, very readily. "I saw him yesterday,
and many times before."

"You are a fine little man!" said Bellerophon, drawing the child closer
to him. "Come, tell me all about it."

"Why," replied the child, "I often come here to sail little boats in the
fountain, and to gather pretty pebbles out of its basin. And sometimes,
when I look down into the water, I see the image of the winged horse in
the picture of the sky that is there. I wish he would come down, and
take me on his back, and let me ride him up to the moon! But, if I so
much as stir to look at him, he flies far away out of sight."

And Bellerophon put his faith in the child, who had seen the image of
Pegasus in the water, and in the maiden, who had heard him neigh so
melodiously, rather than in the middle-aged clown, who believed only in
cart horses, or in the old man who had forgotten the beautiful things of
his youth.

Therefore, he haunted about the Fountain of Pirene for a great many days
afterward. He kept continually on the watch, looking upward at the sky,
or else down into the water, hoping forever that he should see either
the reflected image of the winged horse, or the marvellous reality. He
held the bridle, with its bright gems and golden bit, always ready in
his hand. The rustic people who dwelt in the neighbourhood, and drove
their cattle to the fountain to drink, would often laugh at poor
Bellerophon, and sometimes take him pretty severely to task. They told
him that an able-bodied young man like himself ought to have better
business than to be wasting his time in such an idle pursuit. They
offered to sell him a horse, if he wanted one; and when Bellerophon
declined the purchase, they tried to drive a bargain with him for his
fine bridle.

Even the country boys thought him so very foolish that they used to have
a great deal of sport about him, and were rude enough not to care a fig,
although Bellerophon saw and heard it. One little urchin, for example,
would play Pegasus, and cut the oddest imaginable capers, by way of
flying; while one of his schoolfellows would scamper after him, holding
forth a twist of bulrushes, which was intended to represent
Bellerophon's ornamental bridle. But the gentle child, who had seen the
picture of Pegasus in the water, comforted the young stranger more than
all the naughty boys could torment him. The dear little fellow, in his
play hours, often sat down beside him, and, without speaking a word,
would look down into the fountain and up toward the sky, with so
innocent a faith that Bellerophon could not help feeling encouraged.

Now you will, perhaps, wish to be told why it was that Bellerophon had
undertaken to catch the winged horse. And we shall find no better
opportunity to speak about this matter than while he is waiting for
Pegasus to appear.

If I were to relate the whole of Bellerophon's previous adventures, they
might easily grow into a very long story. It will be quite enough to say
that, in a certain country of Asia, a terrible monster, called a
Chimæra, had made its appearance, and was doing more mischief than could
be talked about between now and sunset. According to the best accounts
which I have been able to obtain, this Chimæra was nearly, if not quite,
the ugliest and most poisonous creature, and the strangest and
unaccountablest, and the hardest to fight with, and the most difficult
to run away from, that ever came out of the earth's inside. It had a
tail like a boa-constrictor; its body was like I do not care what; and
it had three separate heads, one of which was a lion's, the second a
goat's, and the third an abominably great snake's. And a hot blast of
fire came flaming out of each of its three mouths! Being an earthly
monster, I doubt whether it had any wings; but, wings or no, it ran like
a goat and a lion, and wriggled along like a serpent, and thus contrived
to make about as much speed as all the three together.

Oh, the mischief, and mischief, and mischief that this naughty creature
did! With its flaming breath, it could set a forest on fire, or burn up
a field of grain, or, for that matter, a village, with all its fences
and houses. It laid waste the whole country round about, and used to eat
up people and animals alive, and cook them afterward in the burning oven
of its stomach. Mercy on us, little children, I hope neither you nor I
will ever happen to meet a Chimæra!

While the hateful beast (if a beast we can anywise call it) was doing
all these horrible things, it so chanced that Bellerophon came to that
part of the world, on a visit to the king. The king's name was Iobates,
and Lycia was the country which he ruled over. Bellerophon was one of
the bravest youths in the world, and desired nothing so much as to do
some valiant and beneficent deed, such as would make all mankind admire
and love him. In those days, the only way for a young man to distinguish
himself was by fighting battles, either with the enemies of his country,
or with wicked giants, or with troublesome dragons, or with wild beasts,
when he could find nothing more dangerous to encounter. King Iobates,
perceiving the courage of his youthful visitor, proposed to him to go
and fight the Chimæra, which everybody else was afraid of, and which,
unless it should be soon killed, was likely to convert Lycia into a
desert. Bellerophon hesitated not a moment, but assured the king that he
would either slay this dreaded Chimæra, or perish in the attempt.

But, in the first place, as the monster was so prodigiously swift, he
bethought himself that he should never win the victory by fighting on
foot. The wisest thing he could do, therefore, was to get the very best
and fleetest horse that could anywhere be found. And what other horse in
all the world was half so fleet as the marvellous horse Pegasus, who had
wings as well as legs, and was even more active in the air than on the
earth? To be sure, a great many people denied that there was any such
horse with wings, and said that the stories about him were all poetry
and nonsense. But, wonderful as it appeared, Bellerophon believed that
Pegasus was a real steed, and hoped that he himself might be fortunate
enough to find him; and, once fairly mounted on his back, he would be
able to fight the Chimæra at better advantage.

And this was the purpose with which he had travelled from Lycia to
Greece, and had brought the beautifully ornamented bridle in his hand.
It was an enchanted bridle. If he could only succeed in putting the
golden bit into the mouth of Pegasus, the winged horse would be
submissive, and would own Bellerophon for his master, and fly
whithersoever he might choose to turn the rein.

But, indeed, it was a weary and anxious time, while Bellerophon waited
and waited for Pegasus, in hopes that he would come and drink at the
Fountain of Pirene. He was afraid lest King Iobates should imagine that
he had fled from the Chimæra. It pained him, too, to think how much
mischief the monster was doing, while he himself, instead of righting
with it, was compelled to sit idly poring over the bright waters of
Pirene, as they gushed out of the sparkling sand. And as Pegasus came
thither so seldom in these latter years, and scarcely alighted there
more than once in a lifetime, Bellerophon feared that he might grow an
old man, and have no strength left in his arms nor courage in his heart,
before the winged horse would appear. Oh, how heavily passes the time,
while an adventurous youth is yearning to do his part in life, and to
gather in the harvest of his renown! How hard a lesson it is to wait!
Our life is brief, and how much of it is spent in teaching us only this!

Well was it for Bellerophon that the gentle child had grown so fond of
him, and was never weary of keeping him company. Every morning the child
gave him a new hope to put in his bosom, instead of yesterday's withered
one.

"Dear Bellerophon," he would cry, looking up hopefully into his face, "I
think we shall see Pegasus to-day!"

And, at length, if it had not been for the little boy's unwavering
faith, Bellerophon would have given up all hope, and would have gone
back to Lycia, and have done his best to slay the Chimæra without the
help of the winged horse. And in that case poor Bellerophon would at
least have been terribly scorched by the creature's breath, and would
most probably have been killed and devoured. Nobody should ever try to
fight an earth-born Chimæra, unless he can first get upon the back of an
aërial steed.

One morning the child spoke to Bellerophon even more hopefully than
usual.

"Dear, dear Bellerophon," cried he, "I know not why it is, but I feel as
if we should certainly see Pegasus to-day!"

And all that day he would not stir a step from Bellerophon's side; so
they ate a crust of bread together, and drank some of the water of the
fountain. In the afternoon, there they sat, and Bellerophon had thrown
his arm around the child, who likewise had put one of his little hands
into Bellerophon's. The latter was lost in his own thoughts, and was
fixing his eyes vacantly on the trunks of the trees that overshadowed
the fountain, and on the grapevines that clambered up among their
branches. But the gentle child was gazing down into the water; he was
grieved, for Bellerophon's sake, that the hope of another day should be
deceived, like so many before it; and two or three quiet tear-drops fell
from his eyes, and mingled with what were said to be the many tears of
Pirene, when she wept for her slain children.

But, when he least thought of it, Bellerophon felt the pressure of the
child's little hand, and heard a soft, almost breathless, whisper.

"See there, dear Bellerophon! There is an image in the water!"

The young man looked down into the dimpling mirror of the fountain, and
saw what he took to be the reflection of a bird which seemed to be
flying at a great height in the air, with a gleam of sunshine on its
snowy or silvery wings.

"What a splendid bird it must be!" said he. "And how very large it
looks, though it must really be flying higher than the clouds!"

"It makes me tremble!" whispered the child. "I am afraid to look up into
the air! It is very beautiful, and yet I dare only look at its image in
the water. Dear Bellerophon, do you not see that it is no bird? It is
the winged horse Pegasus!"

Bellerophon's heart began to throb! He gazed keenly upward, but could
not see the winged creature, whether bird or horse; because, just then,
it had plunged into the fleecy depths of a summer cloud. It was but a
moment, however, before the object reappeared, sinking lightly down out
of the cloud, although still at a vast distance from the earth.
Bellerophon caught the child in his arms, and shrank back with him, so
that they were both hidden among the thick shrubbery which grew all
around the fountain. Not that he was afraid of any harm, but he dreaded
lest, if Pegasus caught a glimpse of them, he would fly far away, and
alight in some inaccessible mountain-top. For it was really the winged
horse. After they had expected him so long, he was coming to quench his
thirst with the water of Pirene.

Nearer and nearer came the aërial wonder, flying in great circles, as
you may have seen a dove when about to alight. Downward came Pegasus, in
those wide, sweeping circles, which grew narrower, and narrower still,
as he gradually approached the earth. The nigher the view of him, the
more beautiful he was, and the more marvellous the sweep of his silvery
wings. At last, with so light a pressure as hardly to bend the grass
about the fountain, or imprint a hoof tramp in the sand of its margin,
he alighted, and, stooping his wild head, began to drink. He drew in the
water, with long and pleasant sighs, and tranquil pauses of enjoyment;
and then another draught, and another, and another. For, nowhere in the
world, or up among the clouds, did Pegasus love any water as he loved
this of Pirene. And when his thirst was slaked, he cropped a few of the
honey blossoms of the clover, delicately tasting them, but not caring to
make a hearty meal, because the herbage just beneath the clouds, on the
lofty sides of Mount Helicon, suited his palate better than this
ordinary grass.

After thus drinking to his heart's content, and in his dainty fashion
condescending to take a little food, the winged horse began to caper to
and fro, and dance as it were, out of mere idleness and sport. There
never was a more playful creature made than this very Pegasus. So there
he frisked, in a way that it delights me to think about, fluttering his
great wings as lightly as ever did a linnet, and running little races,
half on earth and half in air, and which I know not whether to call a
flight or a gallop. When a creature is perfectly able to fly, he
sometimes chooses to run, just for the pastime of the thing; and so did
Pegasus, although it cost him some little trouble to keep his hoofs so
near the ground. Bellerophon, meanwhile, holding the child's hand,
peeped forth from the shrubbery, and thought that never was any sight so
beautiful as this, nor ever a horse's eyes so wild and spirited as those
of Pegasus. It seemed a sin to think of bridling him and riding on his
back.

Once or twice, Pegasus stopped, and snuffed the air, pricking up his
ears, tossing his head, and turning it on all sides, as if he partly
suspected some mischief or other. Seeing nothing, however, and hearing
no sound, he soon began his antics again.

At length--not that he was weary, but only idle and luxurious--Pegasus
folded his wings, and lay down on the soft green turf. But, being too
full of aërial life to remain quiet for many moments together, he soon
rolled over on his back, with his four slender legs in the air. It was
beautiful to see him, this one solitary creature, whose mate had never
been created, but who needed no companion, and, living a great many
hundred years, was as happy as the centuries were long. The more he did
such things as mortal horses are accustomed to do, the less earthly and
the more wonderful he seemed. Bellerophon and the child almost held
their breaths, partly from a delightful awe, but still more because they
dreaded lest the slightest stir or murmur should send him up, with the
speed of an arrow flight, into the farthest blue of the sky.

Finally, when he had had enough of rolling over and over, Pegasus turned
himself about, and, indolently, like any other horse, put out his fore
legs, in order to rise from the ground; and Bellerophon, who had guessed
that he would do so, darted suddenly from the thicket, and leaped
astride of his back.

Yes, there he sat, on the back of the winged horse!

But what a bound did Pegasus make, when, for the first time, he felt the
weight of a mortal man upon his loins! A bound, indeed! Before he had
time to draw a breath Bellerophon found himself five hundred feet aloft,
and still shooting upward, while the winged horse snorted and trembled
with terror and anger. Upward he went, up, up, up, until he plunged into
the cold misty bosom of a cloud, at which, only a little while before,
Bellerophon had been gazing, and fancying it a very pleasant spot. Then
again, out of the heart of the cloud, Pegasus shot down like a
thunderbolt, as if he meant to dash both himself and his rider headlong
against a rock. Then he went through about a thousand of the wildest
caprioles that had ever been performed either by a bird or a horse.

I cannot tell you half that he did. He skimmed straight forward, and
sideways, and backward. He reared himself erect, with his fore legs on a
wreath of mist, and his hind legs on nothing at all. He flung out his
heels behind, and put down his head between his legs, with his wings
pointing right upward. At about two miles' height above the earth, he
turned a somerset, so that Bellerophon's heels were where his head
should have been, and he seemed to look down into the sky, instead of
up. He twisted his head about, and, looking Bellerophon in the face,
with fire flashing from his eyes, made a terrible attempt to bite him.
He fluttered his pinions so wildly that one of the silver feathers was
shaken out, and floating earthward, was picked up by the child, who kept
it as long as he lived, in memory of Pegasus and Bellerophon.

But the latter (who, as you may judge, was as good a horseman as ever
galloped) had been watching his opportunity, and at last clapped the
golden bit of the enchanted bridle between the winged steed's jaws. No
sooner was this done, than Pegasus became as manageable as if he had
taken food all his life out of Bellerophon's hand. To speak what I
really feel, it was almost a sadness to see so wild a creature grow
suddenly so tame. And Pegasus seemed to feel it so, likewise. He looked
round to Bellerophon, with the tears in his beautiful eyes, instead of
the fire that so recently flashed from them. But when Bellerophon patted
his head, and spoke a few authoritative yet kind and soothing words,
another look came into the eyes of Pegasus; for he was glad at heart,
after so many lonely centuries, to have found a companion and a master.

Thus it always is with winged horses, and with all such wild and
solitary creatures. If you can catch and overcome them, it is the surest
way to win their love.

While Pegasus had been doing his utmost to shake Bellerophon off his
back, he had flown a very long distance; and they had come within sight
of a lofty mountain by the time the bit was in his mouth. Bellerophon
had seen this mountain before, and knew it to be Helicon, on the summit
of which was the winged horse's abode. Thither (after looking gently
into his rider's face, as if to ask leave) Pegasus now flew, and,
alighting, waited patiently until Bellerophon should please to dismount.
The young man, accordingly, leaped from his steed's back, but still held
him fast by the bridle. Meeting his eyes, however, he was so affected by
the gentleness of his aspect, and by the thought of the free life which
Pegasus had heretofore lived, that he could not bear to keep him a
prisoner, if he really desired his liberty.

Obeying this generous impulse he slipped the enchanted bridle off the
head of Pegasus, and took the bit from his mouth.

"Leave me, Pegasus!" said he. "Either leave me, or love me."

In an instant, the winged horse shot almost out of sight, soaring upward
from the summit of Mount Helicon. Being long after sunset, it was now
twilight on the mountain-top, and dusky evening over all the country
round about. But Pegasus flew so high that he overtook the departed day,
and was bathed in the upper radiance of the sun. Ascending higher and
higher, he looked like a bright speck, and, at last, could no longer be
seen in the hollow waste of the sky. And Bellerophon was afraid that he
should never behold him more. But, while he was lamenting his own folly,
the bright speck reappeared, and drew nearer and nearer, until it
descended lower than the sunshine; and, behold, Pegasus had come back!
After this trial there was no more fear of the winged horse's making his
escape. He and Bellerophon were friends, and put loving faith in one
another.

That night they lay down and slept together, with Bellerophon's arm
about the neck of Pegasus, not as a caution, but for kindness. And they
awoke at peep of day, and bade one another good-morning, each in his own
language.

In this manner, Bellerophon and the wondrous steed spent several days,
and grew better acquainted and fonder of each other all the time. They
went on long aërial journeys, and sometimes ascended so high that the
earth looked hardly bigger than--the moon. They visited distant
countries, and amazed the inhabitants, who thought that the beautiful
young man, on the back of the winged horse, must have come down out of
the sky. A thousand miles a day was no more than an easy space for the
fleet Pegasus to pass over. Bellerophon was delighted with this kind of
life, and would have liked nothing better than to live always in the
same way, aloft in the clear atmosphere; for it was always sunny weather
up there, however cheerless and rainy it might be in the lower region.
But he could not forget the horrible Chimæra, which he had promised King
Iobates to slay. So, at last, when he had become well accustomed, to
feats of horsemanship in the air, and could manage Pegasus with the
least motion of his hand, and had taught him to obey his voice, he
determined to attempt the performance of this perilous adventure.

At daybreak, therefore, as soon as he unclosed his eyes, he gently
pinched the winged horse's ear, in order to arouse him. Pegasus
immediately started from the ground, and pranced about a quarter of a
mile aloft, and made a grand sweep around the mountain-top, by way of
showing that he was wide awake, and ready for any kind of an excursion.
During the whole of this little flight, he uttered a loud, brisk, and
melodious neigh, and finally came down at Bellerophon's side, as lightly
as ever you saw a sparrow hop upon a twig.

"Well done, dear Pegasus I well done, my sky-skimmer!" cried
Bellerophon, fondly stroking the horse's neck. "And now, my fleet and
beautiful friend, we must break our fast. To-day we are to fight the
terrible Chimæra."

As soon as they had eaten their morning meal, and drank some sparkling
water from a spring called Hippocrene, Pegasus held out his head, of his
own accord, so that his master might put on the bridle. Then, with a
great many playful leaps and airy caperings, he showed his impatience to
be gone; while Bellerophon was girding on his sword, and hanging his
shield about his neck, and preparing himself for battle. When everything
was ready, the rider mounted, and (as was his custom, when going a long
distance) ascended five miles perpendicularly, so as the better to see
whither he was directing his course. He then turned the head of Pegasus
toward the east, and set out for Lycia. In their flight they overtook an
eagle, and came so nigh him, before he could get out of their way, that
Bellerophon might easily have caught him by the leg. Hastening onward at
this rate, it was still early in the forenoon when they beheld the lofty
mountains of Lycia, with their deep and shaggy valleys. If Bellerophon
had been told truly, it was in one of those dismal valleys that the
hideous Chimæra had taken up its abode.

Being now so near their journey's end, the winged horse gradually
descended with his rider; and they took advantage of some clouds that
were floating over the mountain-tops, in order to conceal themselves.
Hovering on the upper surface of a cloud, and peeping over its edge,
Bellerophon had a pretty distinct view of the mountainous part of Lycia,
and could look into all its shadowy vales at once. At first there
appeared to be nothing remarkable. It was a wild, savage, and rocky
tract of high and precipitous hills. In the more level part of the
country, there were the ruins of houses that had been burnt, and, here
and there, the carcasses of dead cattle, strewn about the pastures where
they had been feeding.

"The Chimæra must have done this mischief," thought Bellerophon. "But
where can the monster be?"

As I have already said, there was nothing remarkable to be detected, at
first sight, in any of the valleys and dells that lay among the
precipitous heights of the mountains. Nothing at all; unless, indeed, it
were three spires of black smoke, which issued from what seemed to be
the mouth of a cavern, and clambered sullenly into the atmosphere.
Before reaching the mountain-top, these three black smoke wreaths
mingled themselves into one. The cavern was almost directly beneath the
winged horse and his rider, at the distance of about a thousand feet.
The smoke, as it crept heavily upward, had an ugly, sulphurous, stifling
scent, which caused Pegasus to snort and Bellerophon to sneeze. So
disagreeable was it to the marvellous steed (who was accustomed to
breathe only the purest air), that he waved his wings, and shot half a
mile out of the range of this offensive vapour.

But, on looking behind him, Bellerophon saw something that induced him
first to draw the bridle, and then to turn Pegasus about. He made a
sign, which the winged horse understood, and sunk slowly through the
air, until his hoofs were scarcely more than a man's height above the
rocky bottom of the valley. In front, as far off as you could throw a
stone, was the cavern's mouth, with the three smoke wreaths oozing out
of it. And what else did Bellerophon behold there?

There seemed to be a heap of strange and terrible creatures curled up
within the cavern. Their bodies lay so close together that Bellerophon
could not distinguish them apart; but, judging by their heads, one of
these creatures was a huge snake, the second a fierce lion, and the
third an ugly goat. The lion and the goat were asleep; the snake was
broad awake, and kept staring around him with a great pair of fiery
eyes. But--and this was the most wonderful part of the matter--the three
spires of smoke evidently issued from the nostrils of these three heads!
So strange was the spectacle, that, though Bellerophon had been all
along expecting it, the truth did not immediately occur to him, that
here was the terrible three-headed Chimæra. He had found out the
Chimæra's cavern. The snake, the lion, and the goat, as he supposed them
to be, were not three separate creatures, but one monster!

The wicked, hateful thing! Slumbering as two-thirds of it were, it still
held, in its abominable claws, the remnant of an unfortunate lamb--or
possibly (but I hate to think so) it was a dear little boy--which its
three mouths had been gnawing, before two of them fell asleep!

All at once, Bellerophon started as from a dream, and knew it to be the
Chimæra. Pegasus seemed to know it, at the same instant, and sent forth
a neigh that sounded like the call of a trumpet to battle. At this sound
the three heads reared themselves erect, and belched out great flashes
of flame. Before Bellerophon had time to consider what to do next, the
monster flung itself out of the cavern and sprung straight toward him,
with its immense claws extended, and its snaky tail twisting itself
venomously behind. If Pegasus had not been as nimble as a bird, both he
and his rider would have been overthrown by the Chimæra's headlong rush,
and thus the battle have been ended before it was well begun. But the
winged horse was not to be caught so. In the twinkling of an eye he was
up aloft, half way to the clouds, snorting with anger. He shuddered,
too, not with affright, but with utter disgust at the loathsomeness of
this poisonous thing with three heads.

The Chimæra, on the other hand, raised itself up so as to stand
absolutely on the tip end of its tail, with its talons pawing fiercely
in the air, and its three heads sputtering fire at Pegasus and his
rider. My stars, how it roared, and hissed, and bellowed! Bellerophon,
meanwhile, was fitting his shield on his arm, and drawing his sword.

"Now, my beloved Pegasus," he whispered in the winged horse's ear, "thou
must help me to slay this insufferable monster; or else thou shalt fly
back to thy solitary mountain peak without thy friend Bellerophon. For
either the Chimæra dies, or its three mouths shall gnaw this head of
mine, which has slumbered upon thy neck!"

Pegasus whinnied, and, turning back his head, rubbed his nose tenderly
against his rider's cheek. It was his way of telling him that, though he
had wings and was an immortal horse, yet he would perish, if it were
possible for immortality to perish, rather than leave Bellerophon
behind.

"I thank you, Pegasus," answered Bellerophon. "Now, then, let us make a
dash at the monster!"

Uttering these words, he shook the bridle; and Pegasus darted down
aslant, as swift as the flight of an arrow, right toward the Chimæra's
threefold head, which, all this time, was poking itself as high as it
could into the air. As he came within arm's length, Bellerophon made a
cut at the monster, but was carried onward by his steed, before he could
see whether the blow had been successful. Pegasus continued his course,
but soon wheeled round, at about the same distance from the Chimæra as
before. Bellerophon then perceived that he had cut the goat's head of
the monster almost off, so that it dangled downward by the skin, and
seemed quite dead.

But, to make amends, the snake's head and the lion's head had taken all
the fierceness of the dead one into themselves, and spit flame, and
hissed, and roared, with a vast deal more fury than before.

"Never mind, my brave Pegasus!" cried Bellerophon. "With another stroke
like that, we will stop either its hissing or its roaring."

And again he shook the bridle. Dashing aslantwise, as before, the winged
horse made another arrow-flight toward the Chimæra, and Bellerophon
aimed another downright stroke at one of the two remaining heads, as he
shot by. But this time, neither he nor Pegasus escaped so well as at
first. With one of its claws, the Chimæra had given the young man a deep
scratch in his shoulder, and had slightly damaged the left wing of the
flying steed with the other. On his part, Bellerophon had mortally
wounded the lion's head of the monster, insomuch that it now hung
downward, with its fire almost extinguished, and sending out gasps of
thick black smoke. The snake's head, however (which was the only one now
left), was twice as fierce and venomous as ever before. It belched forth
shoots of fire five hundred yards long, and emitted hisses so loud, so
harsh, and so ear-piercing, that King Iobates heard them, fifty miles
off, and trembled till the throne shook under him.

"Well-a-day!" thought the poor king; "the Chimæra is certainly coming to
devour me!"

Meanwhile Pegasus had again paused in the air, and neighed angrily,
while sparkles of a pure crystal flame darted out of his eyes. How
unlike the lurid fire of the Chimæra! The aërial steed's spirit was all
aroused, and so was that of Bellerophon.

"Dost thou bleed, my immortal horse?" cried the young man, caring less
for his own hurt than for the anguish of this glorious creature, that
ought never to have tasted pain. "The execrable Chimæra shall pay for
this mischief with his last head!"

Then he shook the bridle, shouted loudly, and guided Pegasus, not
aslantwise as before, but straight at the monster's hideous front. So
rapid was the onset that it seemed but a dazzle and a flash before
Bellerophon was at close gripes with his enemy.

The Chimæra, by this time, after losing its second head, had got into a
red-hot passion of pain and rampant rage. It so flounced about, half on
earth and partly in the air, that it was impossible to say which element
it rested upon. It opened its snake jaws to such an abominable width,
that Pegasus might almost, I was going to say, have flown right down its
throat, wings outspread, rider and all! At their approach it shot out a
tremendous blast of its fiery breath, and enveloped Bellerophon and his
steed in a perfect atmosphere of flame, singeing the wings of Pegasus,
scorching off one whole side of the young man's golden ringlets, and
making them both far hotter than was comfortable, from head to foot.

But this was nothing to what followed.

When the airy rush of the winged horse had brought him within the
distance of a hundred yards, the Chimæra gave a spring, and flung its
huge, awkward, venomous, and utterly detestable carcass right upon poor
Pegasus, clung round him with might and main, and tied up its snaky tail
into a knot! Up flew the aërial steed, higher, higher, higher, above the
mountain-peak, above the clouds, and almost out of sight of the solid
earth. But still the earth-born monster kept its hold, and was borne
upward, along with the creature of light and air. Bellerophon,
meanwhile, turning about, found himself face to face with the ugly
grimness of the Chimæra's visage, and could only avoid being scorched to
death, or bitten right in twain, by holding up his shield. Over the
upper edge of the shield, he looked sternly into the savage eyes of the
monster.

But the Chimæra was so mad and wild with pain that it did not guard
itself so well as might else have been the case. Perhaps, after all,
the best way to fight a Chimæra is by getting as close to it as you can.
In its efforts to stick its horrible iron claws into its enemy the
creature left its own breast quite exposed; and perceiving this,
Bellerophon thrust his sword up to the hilt into its cruel heart.
Immediately the snaky tail untied its knot. The monster let go its hold
of Pegasus, and fell from that vast height downward; while the fire
within its bosom, instead of being put out, burned fiercer than ever,
and quickly began to consume the dead carcass. Thus it fell out of the
sky, all a-flame, and (it being nightfall before it reached the earth)
was mistaken for a shooting star or a comet. But, at early sunrise, some
cottagers were going to their day's labour, and saw, to their
astonishment, that several acres of ground were strewn with black ashes.
In the middle of a field, there was a heap of whitened bones, a great
deal higher than a haystack. Nothing else was ever seen of the dreadful
Chimæra!

And when Bellerophon had won the victory, he bent forward and kissed
Pegasus, while the tears stood in his eyes.

"Back now, my beloved steed!" said he. "Back to the Fountain of Pirene!"

Pegasus skimmed through the air, quicker than ever he did before, and
reached the fountain in a very short time. And there he found the old
man leaning on his staff, and the country fellow watering his cow, and
the pretty maiden filling her pitcher.

"I remember now," quoth the old man, "I saw this winged horse once
before, when I was quite a lad. But he was ten times handsomer in those
days."

"I own a cart horse worth three of him!" said the country fellow. "If
this pony were mine, the first thing I should do would be to clip his
wings!"

But the poor maiden said nothing, for she had always the luck to be
afraid at the wrong time. So she ran away, and let her pitcher tumble
down, and broke it.

"Where is the gentle child," asked Bellerophon, "who used to keep me
company, and never lost his faith, and never was weary of gazing into
the fountain?"

"Here am I, dear Bellerophon!" said the child, softly.

For the little boy had spent day after day on the margin of Pirene,
waiting for his friend to come back; but when he perceived Bellerophon
descending through the clouds, mounted on the winged horse, he had
shrunk back into the shrubbery. He was a delicate and tender child, and
dreaded lest the old man and the country fellow should see the tears
gushing from his eyes.

"Thou hast won the victory," said he, joyfully, running to the knee of
Bellerophon, who still sat on the back of Pegasus. "I knew thou
wouldst."

"Yes, dear child!" replied Bellerophon, alighting from the winged horse.
"But if thy faith had not helped me, I should never have waited for
Pegasus, and never have gone up above the clouds, and never have
conquered the terrible Chimæra. Thou, my beloved little friend, hast
done it all. And now let us give Pegasus his liberty."

So he slipped off the enchanted bridle from the head of the marvellous
steed.

"Be free, forevermore, my Pegasus!" cried he, with a shade of sadness in
his tone. "Be as free as thou art fleet!"

But Pegasus rested his head on Bellerophon's shoulder, and would not be
persuaded to take flight.

"Well then," said Bellerophon, caressing the airy horse, "thou shalt be
with me as long as thou wilt; and we will go together, forthwith, and
tell King Iobates that the Chimæra is destroyed."

Then Bellerophon embraced the gentle child, and promised to come to him
again, and departed. But, in after years, that child took higher flights
upon the aërial steed than ever did Bellerophon, and achieved more
honourable deeds than his friend's victory over the Chimæra. For, gentle
and tender as he was, he grew to be a mighty poet!




CHAPTER IV

THE GOLDEN TOUCH


Once upon a time, there lived a very rich man, and a king besides, whose
name was Midas; and he had a little daughter, whom nobody but myself
ever heard of, and whose name I either never knew, or have entirely
forgotten. So, because I love odd names for little girls, I choose to
call her Marygold.

This King Midas was fonder of gold than of anything else in the world.
He valued his royal crown chiefly because it was composed of that
precious metal. If he loved anything better, or half so well, it was the
one little maiden who played so merrily around her father's footstool.
But the more Midas loved his daughter, the more did he desire and seek
for wealth. He thought, foolish man! that the best thing he could
possibly do for this dear child would be to bequeath her the immensest
pile of yellow, glistening coin, that had ever been heaped together
since the world was made. Thus, he gave all his thoughts and all his
time to this one purpose. If ever he happened to gaze for an instant at
the gold-tinted clouds of sunset, he wished that they were real gold,
and that they could be squeezed safely into his strong box. When little
Marygold ran to meet him, with a bunch of buttercups and dandelions, he
used to say, "Poh, poh, child! If these flowers were as golden as they
look, they would be worth the plucking!"

And yet, in his earlier days, before he was so entirely possessed of
this insane desire for riches, King Midas had shown a great taste for
flowers. He had planted a garden, in which grew the biggest and
beautifullest and sweetest roses that any mortal ever saw or smelt.
These roses were still growing in the garden, as large, as lovely, and
as fragrant as when Midas used to pass whole hours in gazing at them,
and inhaling their perfume. But now, if he looked at them at all, it was
only to calculate how much the garden would be worth if each of the
innumerable rose petals were a thin plate of gold. And though he once
was fond of music (in spite of an idle story about his ears, which were
said to resemble those of an ass), the only music for poor Midas, now,
was the chink of one coin against another.

At length (as people always grow more and more foolish, unless they take
care to grow wiser and wiser), Midas had got to be so exceedingly
unreasonable that he could scarcely bear to see or touch any object that
was not gold. He made it his custom, therefore, to pass a large portion
of every day in a dark and dreary apartment, under ground, at the
basement of his palace. It was here that he kept his wealth. To this
dismal hole--for it was little better than a dungeon--Midas betook
himself, whenever he wanted to be particularly happy. Here, after
carefully locking the door, he would take a bag of gold coin, or a gold
cup as big as a washbowl, or a heavy golden bar, or a peck measure of
gold dust, and bring them from the obscure corners of the room into the
one bright and narrow sunbeam that fell from the dungeon-like window. He
valued the sunbeam for no other reason but that his treasure would not
shine without its help. And then would he reckon over the coins in the
bag; toss up the bar, and catch it as it came down; sift the gold dust
through his fingers; look at the funny image of his own face, as
reflected in the burnished circumference of the cup, and whisper to
himself, "O Midas, rich King Midas, what a happy man art thou!" But it
was laughable to see how the image of his face kept grinning at him, out
of the polished surface of the cup. It seemed to be aware of his foolish
behaviour, and to have a naughty inclination to make fun of him.

Midas called himself a happy man, but felt that he was not yet quite so
happy as he might be. The very tiptop of enjoyment would never be
reached, unless the whole world were to become his treasure room, and be
filled with yellow metal which should be all his own.

Now, I need hardly remind such wise little people as you are, that in
the old, old times, when King Midas was alive, a great many things came
to pass, which we should consider wonderful if they were to happen in
our own day and country. And, on the other hand, a great many things
take place nowadays, which seem not only wonderful to us, but at which
the people of old times would have stared their eyes out. On the whole,
I regard our own times as the strangest of the two; but, however that
may be, I must go on with my story.

Midas was enjoying himself in his treasure room, one day, as usual, when
he perceived a shadow fall over the heaps of gold; and, looking suddenly
up, what should he behold but the figure of a stranger, standing in the
bright and narrow sunbeam! It was a young man, with a cheerful and ruddy
face. Whether it was that the imagination of King Midas threw a yellow
tinge over everything, or whatever the cause might be, he could not
help fancying that the smile with which the stranger regarded him had a
kind of golden radiance in it. Certainly, although his figure
intercepted the sunshine, there was now a brighter gleam upon all the
piled-up treasures than before. Even the remotest corners had their
share of it, and were lighted up, when the stranger smiled, as with tips
of flame and sparkles of fire.

As Midas knew that he had carefully turned the key in the lock, and that
no mortal strength could possibly break into his treasure room, he, of
course, concluded that his visitor must be something more than mortal.
It is no matter about telling you who he was. In those days, when the
earth was comparatively a new affair, it was supposed to be often the
resort of beings endowed with supernatural power, and who used to
interest themselves in the joys and sorrows of men, women, and children,
half playfully and half seriously. Midas had met such beings before now,
and was not sorry to meet one of them again. The stranger's aspect,
indeed, was so good humoured and kindly, if not beneficent, that it
would have been unreasonable to suspect him of intending any mischief.
It was far more probable that he came to do Midas a favour. And what
could that favour be, unless to multiply his heaps of treasure?

The stranger gazed about the room; and when his lustrous smile had
glistened upon all the golden objects that were there, he turned again
to Midas.

"You are a wealthy man, friend Midas!" he observed. "I doubt whether any
other four walls, on earth, contain so much gold as you have contrived
to pile up in this room."

"I have done pretty well--pretty well," answered Midas, in a
discontented tone. "But, after all, it is but a trifle, when you
consider that it has taken me my whole life to get it together. If one
could live a thousand years, he might have time to grow rich!"

"What!" exclaimed the stranger. "Then you are not satisfied?"

Midas shook his head.

"And pray what would satisfy you?" asked the stranger. "Merely for the
curiosity of the thing, I should be glad to know."

Midas paused and meditated. He felt a presentiment that this stranger,
with such a golden lustre in his good-humoured smile, had come hither
with both the power and the purpose of gratifying his utmost wishes.
Now, therefore, was the fortunate moment, when he had but to speak, and
obtain whatever possible, or seemingly impossible thing, it might come
into his head to ask. So he thought, and thought, and thought, and
heaped up one golden mountain upon another, in his imagination, without
being able to imagine them big enough. At last, a bright idea occurred
to King Midas. It seemed really as bright as the glistening metal which
he loved so much.

Raising his head, he looked the lustrous stranger in the face.

"Well, Midas," observed his visitor, "I see that you have at length hit
upon something that will satisfy you. Tell me your wish."

"It is only this," replied Midas. "I am weary of collecting my treasures
with so much trouble, and beholding the heap so diminutive, after I have
done my best. I wish everything that I touch to be changed to gold!"

The stranger's smile grew so very broad, that it seemed to fill the room
like an outburst of the sun, gleaming into a shadowy dell, where the
yellow autumnal leaves--for so looked the lumps and particles of
gold--lie strewn in the glow of light.

"The Golden Touch!" exclaimed he. "You certainly deserve credit, friend
Midas, for striking out so brilliant a conception. But are you quite
sure that this will satisfy you?"

"How could it fail?" said Midas.

"And will you never regret the possession of it?"

"What could induce me?" asked Midas. "I ask nothing else, to render me
perfectly happy."

"Be it as you wish, then," replied the stranger, waving his hand in
token of farewell. "To-morrow, at sunrise, you will find yourself gifted
with the Golden Touch."

The figure of the stranger then became exceedingly bright, and Midas
involuntarily closed his eyes. On opening them again, he beheld only one
yellow sunbeam in the room, and, all around him, the glistening of the
precious metal which he had spent his life in hoarding up.

Whether Midas slept as usual that night, the story does not say. Asleep
or awake, however, his mind was probably in the state of a child's, to
whom a beautiful new plaything has been promised in the morning. At any
rate, day had hardly peeped over the hills, when King Midas was broad
awake, and, stretching his arms out of bed, began to touch the objects
that were within reach. He was anxious to prove whether the Golden Touch
had really come, according to the stranger's promise. So he laid his
finger on a chair by the bedside, and on various other things, but was
grievously disappointed to perceive that they remained of exactly the
same substance as before. Indeed, he felt very much afraid that he had
only dreamed about the lustrous stranger, or else that the latter had
been making game of him. And what a miserable affair would it be, if,
after all his hopes, Midas must content himself with what little gold he
could scrape together by ordinary means, instead of creating it by a
touch!

All this while, it was only the gray of the morning, with but a streak
of brightness along the edge of the sky, where Midas could not see it.
He lay in a very disconsolate mood, regretting the downfall of his hopes
and kept growing sadder and sadder, until the earliest sunbeam shone
through the window, and gilded the ceiling over his head. It seemed to
Midas that this bright yellow sunbeam was reflected in rather a singular
way on the white covering of the bed. Looking more closely, what was his
astonishment and delight, when he found that this linen fabric had been
transmuted to what seemed a woven texture of the purest and brightest
gold! The Golden Touch had come to him with the first sunbeam!

Midas started up, in a kind of joyful frenzy, and ran about the room,
grasping at everything that happened to be in his way. He seized one of
the bedposts, and it became immediately a fluted golden pillar. He
pulled aside a window curtain, in order to admit a clear spectacle of
the wonders which he was performing; and the tassel grew heavy in his
hand--a mass of gold. He took up a book from the table. At his first
touch, it assumed the appearance of such a splendidly bound and
gilt-edged volume as one often meets with, nowadays; but, on running his
fingers through the leaves, behold! it was a bundle of thin golden
plates, in which all the wisdom of the book had grown illegible. He
hurriedly put on his clothes, and was enraptured to see himself in a
magnificent suit of gold cloth, which retained its flexibility and
softness, although it burdened him a little with its weight. He drew out
his handkerchief, which little Marygold had hemmed for him. That was
likewise gold, with the dear child's neat and pretty stitches running
all along the border, in gold thread!

Somehow or other, this last transformation did not quite please King
Midas. He would rather that his little daughter's handiwork should have
remained just the same as when she climbed his knee and put it into his
hand.

But it was not worth while to vex himself about a trifle. Midas now took
his spectacles from his pocket, and put them on his nose, in order that
he might see more distinctly what he was about. In those days,
spectacles for common people had not been invented, but were already
worn by kings: else, how could Midas have had any? To his great
perplexity, however, excellent as the glasses were, he discovered that
he could not possibly see through them. But this was the most natural
thing in the world; for, on taking them off, the transparent crystals
turned out to be plates of yellow metal, and, of course, were worthless
as spectacles, though valuable as gold. It struck Midas, as rather
inconvenient that, with all his wealth, he could never again be rich
enough to own a pair of serviceable spectacles.

"It is no great matter, nevertheless," said he to himself, very
philosophically. "We cannot expect any great good, without its being
accompanied with some small inconvenience. The Golden Touch is worth
the sacrifice of a pair of spectacles, at least, if not of one's very
eyesight. My own eyes will serve for ordinary purposes, and little
Marygold will soon be old enough to read to me."

Wise King Midas was so exalted by his good fortune, that the palace
seemed not sufficiently spacious to contain him. He therefore went
downstairs, and smiled, on observing that the balustrade of the
staircase became a bar of burnished gold, as his hand passed over it, in
his descent. He lifted the doorlatch (it was brass only a moment ago,
but golden when his fingers quitted it), and emerged into the garden.
Here, as it happened, he found a great number of beautiful roses in full
bloom, and others in all the stages of lovely bud and blossom. Very
delicious was their fragrance in the morning breeze. Their delicate
blush was one of the fairest sights in the world; so gentle, so modest,
and so full of sweet tranquillity, did these roses seem to be.

But Midas knew a way to make them far more precious, according to his
way of thinking, than roses had ever been before. So he took great pains
in going from bush to bush, and exercised his magic touch most
indefatigably; until every individual flower and bud, and even the worms
at the heart of some of them, were changed to gold. By the time this
good work was completed, King Midas was summoned to breakfast; and as
the morning air had given him an excellent appetite, he made haste back
to the palace.

What was usually a king's breakfast in the days of Midas, I really do
not know, and cannot stop now to investigate. To the best of my belief,
however, on this particular morning, the breakfast consisted of hot
cakes, some nice little brook trout, roasted potatoes, fresh boiled
eggs, and coffee, for King Midas himself, and a bowl of bread and milk
for his daughter Marygold. At all events, this is a breakfast fit to set
before a king; and, whether he had it or not, King Midas could not have
had a better.

Little Marygold had not yet made her appearance. Her father ordered her
to be called, and, seating himself at table, awaited the child's coming,
in order to begin his own breakfast. To do Midas justice, he really
loved his daughter, and loved her so much the more this morning, on
account of the good fortune which had befallen him. It was not a great
while before he heard her coming along the passageway crying bitterly.
This circumstance surprised him, because Marygold was one of the
cheerfullest little people whom you would see in a summer's day, and
hardly shed a thimbleful of tears in a twelvemonth. When Midas heard her
sobs, he determined to put little Marygold into better spirits, by an
agreeable surprise; so, leaning across the table, he touched his
daughter's bowl (which was a china one, with pretty figures all around
it), and transmuted it to gleaming gold.

Meanwhile, Marygold slowly and disconsolately opened the door, and
showed herself with her apron at her eyes, still sobbing as if her heart
would break.

"How now, my little lady!" cried Midas. "Pray what is the matter with
you, this bright morning?"

Marygold, without taking the apron from her eyes, held out her hand, in
which was one of the roses which Midas had so recently transmuted.

"Beautiful!" exclaimed her father. "And what is there in this
magnificent golden rose to make you cry?"

"Ah, dear father!" answered the child, as well as her sobs would let
her; "it is not beautiful, but the ugliest flower that ever grew! As
soon as I was dressed I ran into the garden to gather some roses for
you; because I know you like them, and like them the better when
gathered by your little daughter. But, oh dear, dear me. What do you
think has happened? Such a misfortune! All the beautiful roses, that
smelled so sweetly and had so many lovely blushes, are blighted and
spoilt! They are grown quite yellow, as you see this one, and have no
longer any fragrance! What can have been the matter with them?"

"Poh, my dear little girl--pray don't cry about it!" said Midas, who was
ashamed to confess that he himself had wrought the change which so
greatly afflicted her, "Sit down and eat your bread and milk! You will
find it easy enough to exchange a golden rose like that (which will last
hundreds of years) for an ordinary one which would wither in a day."

"I don't care for such roses as this!" cried Marygold, tossing it
contemptuously away. "It has no smell, and the hard petals prick my
nose!"

The child now sat down to table, but was so occupied with her grief for
the blighted roses that she did not even notice the wonderful
transmutation of her china bowl. Perhaps this was all the better; for
Marygold was accustomed to take pleasure in looking at the queer
figures, and strange trees and houses, that were painted on the
circumference of the bowl; and these ornaments were now entirely lost in
the yellow hue of the metal.

Midas, meanwhile, had poured out a cup of coffee, and, as a matter of
course, the Coffee-pot, whatever metal it may have been when he took it
up, was gold when he set it down. He thought to himself, that it was
rather an extravagant style of splendour, in a king of his simple
habits, to breakfast off a service of gold, and began to be puzzled with
the difficulty of keeping his treasures safe. The cupboard and the
kitchen would no longer be a secure place of deposit for articles so
valuable as golden bowls and coffee-pots.

Amid these thoughts, he lifted a spoonful of coffee to his lips, and,
sipping it, was astonished to perceive that, the instant his lips
touched the liquid, it became molten gold, and, the next moment,
hardened into a lump!

"Ha!" exclaimed Midas, rather aghast.

"What is the matter, father?" asked little Marygold, gazing at him, with
the tears still standing in her eyes.

"Nothing, child, nothing!" said Midas. "Eat your milk, before it gets
quite cold."

He took one of the nice little trouts on his plate, and, by way of
experiment, touched its tail with his finger. To his horror, it was
immediately transmuted from an admirably fried brook trout into a
gold-fish, though not one of those gold-fishes which people often keep
in glass globes, as ornaments for the parlour. No; but it was really a
metallic fish, and looked as if it had been very cunningly made by the
nicest goldsmith in the world. Its little bones were now golden wires;
its fins and tail were thin plates of gold; and there were the marks of
the fork in it, and all the delicate, frothy appearance of a nicely
fried fish, exactly imitated in metal. A very pretty piece of work, as
you may suppose; only King Midas, just at that moment, would much rather
have had a real trout in his dish than this elaborate and valuable
imitation of one.

"I don't quite see," thought he to himself, "how I am to get any
breakfast!"

He took one of the smoking-hot cakes, and had scarcely broken it, when,
to his cruel mortification, though, a moment before, it had been of the
whitest wheat, it assumed the yellow hue of Indian meal. To say the
truth, if it had really been a hot Indian cake, Midas would have prized
it a good deal more than he now did, when its solidity and increased
weight made him too bitterly sensible that it was gold. Almost in
despair, he helped himself to a boiled egg, which immediately underwent
a change similar to those of the trout and the cake. The egg, indeed,
might have been mistaken for one of those which the famous goose, in the
story book, was in the habit of laying; but King Midas was the only
goose that had had anything to do with the matter.

"Well, this is a quandary!" thought he, leaning back in his chair, and
looking quite enviously at little Marygold, who was now eating her bread
and milk with great satisfaction. "Such a costly breakfast before me,
and nothing that can be eaten!"

Hoping that, by dint of great dispatch, he might avoid what he now felt
to be a considerable inconvenience, King Midas next snatched a hot
potato, and attempted to cram it into his mouth, and swallow it in a
hurry. But the Golden Touch was too nimble for him. He found his mouth
full, not of mealy potato, but of solid metal, which so burnt his tongue
that he roared aloud, and, jumping up from the table, began to dance and
stamp about the room, both with pain and affright.

"Father, dear father!" cried little Marygold, who was a very
affectionate child, "pray what is the matter? Have you burnt your
mouth?"

"Ah, dear child," groaned Midas, dolefully, "I don't know what is to
become of your poor father!"

And, truly, my dear little folks, did you ever hear of such a pitiable
case in all your lives? Here was literally the richest breakfast that
could be set before a king, and its very richness made it absolutely
good for nothing. The poorest labourer, sitting down to his crust of
bread and cup of water, was far better off than King Midas, whose
delicate food was really worth its weight in gold. And what was to be
done? Already, at breakfast, Midas was excessively hungry. Would he be
less so by dinner-time? And how ravenous would be his appetite for
supper, which must undoubtedly consist of the same sort of indigestible
dishes as those now before him! How many days, think you, would he
survive a continuance of this rich fare?

These reflections so troubled wise King Midas, that he began to doubt
whether, after all, riches are the one desirable thing in the world, or
even the most desirable. But this was only a passing thought. So
fascinated was Midas with the glitter of the yellow metal, that he would
still have refused to give up the Golden Touch for so paltry a
consideration as a breakfast. Just imagine what a price for one meal's
victuals! It would have been the same as paying millions and millions of
money (and as many millions more as would take forever to reckon up) for
some fried trout, an egg, a potato, a hot cake, and a cup of coffee!

"It would be quite too dear," thought Midas.

Nevertheless, so great was his hunger, and the perplexity of his
situation, that he again groaned aloud, and very grievously, too. Our
pretty Marygold could endure it no longer. She sat, a moment, gazing at
her father, and trying, with all the might of her little wits, to find
out what was the matter with him. Then, with a sweet and sorrowful
impulse to comfort him, she started from her chair, and, running to
Midas, threw her arms affectionately about his knees. He bent down and
kissed her. He felt that his little daughter's love was worth a thousand
times more than he had gained by the Golden Touch.

"My precious, precious Marygold!" cried he.

But Marygold made no answer.

Alas, what had he done? How fatal was the gift which the stranger
bestowed! The moment the lips of Midas touched Marygold's forehead, a
change had taken place. Her sweet, rosy face, so full of affection as it
had been, assumed a glittering yellow colour, with yellow tear-drops
congealing on her cheeks. Her beautiful brown ringlets took the same
tint. Her soft and tender little form grew hard and inflexible within
her father's encircling arms. Oh, terrible misfortune! The victim of his
insatiable desire for wealth, little Marygold was a human child no
longer, but a golden statue!

Yes, there she was, with the questioning look of love, grief, and pity,
hardened into her face. It was the prettiest and most woeful sight that
ever mortal saw. All the features and tokens of Marygold were there;
even the beloved little dimple remained in her golden chin. But, the
more perfect was the resemblance, the greater was the father's agony at
beholding this golden image, which was all that was left him of a
daughter. It had been a favourite phrase of Midas, whenever he felt
particularly fond of the child, to say that she was worth her weight in
gold. And now the phrase had become literally true. And, now, at last,
when it was too late, he felt how infinitely a warm and tender heart,
that loved him, exceeded in value all the wealth that could be piled up
betwixt the earth and sky!

It would be too sad a story, if I were to tell you how Midas, in the
fulness of all his gratified desires, began to wring his hands and
bemoan himself; and how he could neither bear to look at Marygold, nor
yet to look away from her. Except when his eyes were fixed on the image,
he could not possibly believe that she was changed to gold. But,
stealing another glance, there was the precious little figure, with a
yellow tear-drop on its yellow cheek, and a look so piteous and tender,
that it seemed as if that very expression must needs soften the gold,
and make it flesh again. This, however, could not be. So Midas had only
to wring his hands, and to wish that he were the poorest man in the wide
world, if the loss of all his wealth might bring back the faintest rose
colour to his dear child's face.

While he was in this tumult of despair, he suddenly beheld a stranger
standing near the door. Midas bent down his head, without speaking; for
he recognised the same figure which had appeared to him, the day before,
in the treasure-room, and had bestowed on him this disastrous faculty of
the Golden Touch. The stranger's countenance still wore a smile, which
seemed to shed a yellow lustre all about the room, and gleamed on little
Marygold's image, and on the other objects that had been transmuted by
the touch of Midas.

"Well, friend Midas," said the stranger, "pray how do you succeed with
the Golden Touch?"

Midas shook his head.

"I am very miserable," said he.

"Very miserable, indeed!" exclaimed the stranger.

"And how happens that? Have I not faithfully kept my promise with you?
Have you not everything that your heart desired?"

"Gold is not everything," answered Midas. "And I have lost all that my
heart really cared for."

"Ah! So you have made a discovery, since yesterday?" observed the
stranger. "Let us see, then. Which of these two things do you think is
really worth the most--the gift of the Golden Touch, or one cup of clear
cold water?"

"O blessed water!" exclaimed Midas. "I will never moisten my parched
throat again!"

"The Golden Touch," continued the stranger, "or a crust of bread?"

"A piece of bread," answered Midas, "is worth all the gold on earth!"

"The Golden Touch," asked the stranger, "or your own little Marygold,
warm, soft, and loving as she was an hour ago?"

"Oh, my child, my dear child!" cried poor Midas, wringing his hands. "I
would not have given that one small dimple in her chin for the power of
changing this whole big earth into a solid lump of gold!"

"You are wiser than you were, King Midas!" said the stranger, looking
seriously at him. "Your own heart, I perceive, has not been entirely
changed from flesh to gold. Were it so, your case would indeed be
desperate. But you appear to be still capable of understanding that the
commonest things, such as lie within everybody's grasp, are more
valuable than the riches which so many mortals sigh and struggle after.
Tell me, now, do you sincerely desire to rid yourself of this Golden
Touch?"

"It is hateful to me!" replied Midas.

A fly settled on his nose, but immediately fell to the floor; for it,
too, had become gold. Midas shuddered.

"Go, then," said the stranger, "and plunge into the river that glides
past the bottom of your garden. Take likewise a vase of the same water,
and sprinkle it over any object that you may desire to change back again
from gold into its former substance. If you do this in earnestness and
sincerity, it may possibly repair the mischief which your avarice has
occasioned."

King Midas bowed low; and when he lifted his head, the lustrous stranger
had vanished.

You will easily believe that Midas lost no time in snatching up a great
earthen pitcher (but, alas me! it was no longer earthen after he touched
it), and hastening to the river-side. As he scampered along, and forced
his way through the shrubbery, it was positively marvellous to see how
the foliage turned yellow behind him, as if the autumn had been there,
and nowhere else. On reaching the river's brink, he plunged headlong in,
without waiting so much as to pull off his shoes.

"Poof! poof! poof!" snorted King Midas, as his head emerged out of the
water. "Well; this is really a refreshing bath, and I think it must have
quite washed away the Golden Touch. And now for filling my pitcher!"

As he dipped the pitcher into the water, it gladdened his very heart to
see it change from gold into the same good, honest earthen vessel which
it had been before he touched it. He was conscious, also, of a change
within himself. A cold, hard, and heavy weight seemed to have gone out
of his bosom. No doubt, his heart had been gradually losing its human
substance, and transmuting itself into insensible metal, but had now
softened back again into flesh. Perceiving a violet, that grew on the
bank of the river, Midas touched it with his finger, and was overjoyed
to find that the delicate flower retained its purple hue, instead of
undergoing a yellow blight. The curse of the Golden Touch had,
therefore, really been removed from him.

King Midas hastened back to the palace; and, I suppose, the servants
knew not what to make of it when they saw their royal master so
carefully bringing home an earthen pitcher of water. But that water,
which was to undo all the mischief that his folly had wrought, was more
precious to Midas than an ocean of molten gold could have been. The
first thing he did, as you need hardly be told, was to sprinkle it by
handfuls over the golden figure of little Marygold.

No sooner did it fall on her than you would have laughed to see how the
rosy colour came back to the dear child's cheek! and how she began to
sneeze and sputter!--and how astonished she was to find herself dripping
wet, and her father still throwing more water over her!

"Pray do not, dear father!" cried she. "See how you have wet my nice
frock, which I put on only this morning!"

For Marygold did not know that she had been a little golden statue; nor
could she remember anything that had happened since the moment when she
ran with outstretched arms to comfort poor King Midas.

Her father did not think it necessary to tell his beloved child how very
foolish he had been, but contented himself with showing how much wiser
he had now grown. For this purpose, he led little Marygold into the
garden, where he sprinkled all the remainder of the water over the
rose-bushes, and with such good effect that above five thousand roses
recovered their beautiful bloom. There were two circumstances, however,
which, as long as he lived, used to put King Midas in mind of the Golden
Touch. One was, that the sands of the river sparkled like gold; the
other, that little Marygold's hair had now a golden tinge, which he had
never observed in it before she had been transmuted by the effect of his
kiss. This change of hue was really an improvement, and made Marygold's
hair richer than in her babyhood.

When King Midas had grown quite an old man, and used to trot Mary gold's
children on his knee, he was fond of telling them this marvellous story,
pretty much as I have now told it to you. And then would he stroke their
glossy ringlets, and tell them that their hair, likewise, had a rich
shade of gold, which they had inherited from their mother.

"And to tell you the truth, my precious little folks," quoth King Midas,
diligently trotting the children all the while, "ever since that
morning, I have hated the very sight of all other gold, save this!"




CHAPTER V

THE GORGON'S HEAD


Perseus was the son of Danaë, who was the daughter of a king. And when
Perseus was a very little boy, some wicked people put his mother and
himself into a chest, and set them afloat upon the sea. The wind blew
freshly, and drove the chest away from the shore, and the uneasy billows
tossed it up and down; while Danaë clasped her child closely to her
bosom, and dreaded that some big wave would dash its foamy crest over
them both. The chest sailed on, however, and neither sank nor was upset;
until, when night was coming, it floated so near an island that it got
entangled in a fisherman's nets, and was drawn out high and dry upon the
sand. The island was called Seriphus, and it was reigned over by King
Polydectes, who happened to be the fisherman's brother.

This fisherman, I am glad to tell you, was an exceedingly humane and
upright man. He showed great kindness to Danaë and her little boy; and
continued to befriend them, until Perseus had grown to be a handsome
youth, very strong and active, and skilful in the use of arms. Long
before this time, King Polydectes had seen the two strangers--the mother
and her child--who had come to his dominions in a floating chest. As he
was not good and kind, like his brother the fisherman, but extremely
wicked, he resolved to send Perseus on a dangerous enterprise, in which
he would probably be killed, and then to do some great mischief to Danaë
herself. So this bad-hearted king spent a long while in considering what
was the most dangerous thing that a young man could possibly undertake
to perform. At last, having hit upon an enterprise that promised to turn
out as fatally as he desired, he sent for the youthful Perseus.

The young man came to the palace, and found the king sitting upon his
throne.

"Perseus," said King Polydectes, smiling craftily upon him, "you are
grown up a fine young man. You and your good mother have received a
great deal of kindness from myself, as well as from my worthy brother
the fisherman, and I suppose you would not be sorry to repay some of
it."

"Please, Your Majesty," answered Perseus, "I would willingly risk my
life to do so."

"Well, then," continued the king, still with a cunning smile on his
lips, "I have a little adventure to propose to you; and, as you are a
brave and enterprising youth, you will doubtless look upon it as a great
piece of good luck to have so rare an opportunity of distinguishing
yourself. You must know, my good Perseus, I think of getting married to
the beautiful Princess Hippodamia; and it is customary, on these
occasions, to make the bride a present of some far-fetched and elegant
curiosity. I have been a little perplexed, I must honestly confess,
where to obtain anything likely to please a princess of her exquisite
taste. But, this morning, I flatter myself, I have thought of precisely
the article."

"And can I assist Your Majesty in obtaining it?" cried Perseus,
eagerly.

"You can, if you are as brave a youth as I believe you to be," replied
King Polydectes, with the utmost graciousness of manner. "The bridal
gift which I have set my heart on presenting to the beautiful Hippodamia
is the head of the Gorgon Medusa with the snaky locks; and I depend on
you, my dear Perseus, to bring it to me. So, as I am anxious to settle
affairs with the princess, the sooner you go in quest of the Gorgon, the
better I shall be pleased."

"I will set out to-morrow morning," answered Perseus.

"Pray do so, my gallant youth," rejoined the king. "And, Perseus, in
cutting off the Gorgon's head, be careful to make a clean stroke, so as
not to injure its appearance. You must bring it home in the very best
condition, in order to suit the exquisite taste of the beautiful
Princess Hippodamia."

Perseus left the palace, but was scarcely out of hearing before
Polydectes burst into a laugh; being greatly amused, wicked king that he
was, to find how readily the young man fell into the snare. The news
quickly spread abroad that Perseus had undertaken to cut off the head of
Medusa with the snaky locks. Everybody was rejoiced; for most of the
inhabitants of the island were as wicked as the king himself, and would
have liked nothing better than to see some enormous mischief happen to
Danaë and her son. The only good man in this unfortunate island of
Seriphus appears to have been the fisherman. As Perseus walked along,
therefore, the people pointed after him, and made mouths, and winked to
one another, and ridiculed him as loudly as they dared.

"Ho, ho!" cried they; "Medusa's snakes will sting him soundly!"

Now, there were three Gorgons alive at that period; and they were the
most strange and terrible monsters that had ever been since the world
was made, or that have been seen in after days, or that are likely to be
seen in all time to come. I hardly know what sort of creature or
hobgoblin to call them. They were three sisters, and seem to have borne
some distant resemblance to women, but were really a very frightful and
mischievous species of dragon. It is, indeed, difficult to imagine what
hideous beings these three sisters were. Why, instead of locks of hair,
if you can believe me, they had each of them a hundred enormous snakes
growing on their heads, all alive, twisting, wriggling, curling, and
thrusting out their venomous tongues, with forked stings at the end! The
teeth of the Gorgons were terribly long tusks; their hands were made of
brass; and their bodies were all over scales, which, if not iron, were
something as hard and impenetrable. They had wings, too, and exceedingly
splendid ones, I can assure you; for every feather in them was pure,
bright, glittering, burnished gold, and they looked very dazzlingly, no
doubt, when the Gorgons were flying about in the sunshine.

But when people happened to catch a glimpse of their glittering
brightness, aloft in the air, they seldom stopped to gaze, but ran and
hid themselves as speedily as they could. You will think, perhaps, that
they were afraid of being stung by the serpents that served the Gorgons
instead of hair--or of having their heads bitten off by their ugly
tusks--or of being torn all to pieces by their brazen claws. Well, to be
sure, these were some of the dangers, but by no means the greatest, nor
the most difficult to avoid. For the worst thing about these abominable
Gorgons was, that, if once a poor mortal fixed his eyes full upon one
of their faces, he was certain, that very instant, to be changed from
warm flesh and blood into cold and lifeless stone!

Thus, as you will easily perceive, it was a very dangerous adventure
that the wicked King Polydectes had contrived for this innocent young
man. Perseus himself, when he had thought over the matter, could not
help seeing that he had very little chance of coming safely through it,
and that he was far more likely to become a stone image than to bring
back the head of Medusa with the snaky locks. For, not to speak of other
difficulties, there was one which it would have puzzled an older man
than Perseus to get over. Not only must he fight with and slay this
golden-winged, iron-scaled, long-tusked, brazen-clawed, snaky-haired
monster, but he must do it with his eyes shut, or, at least, without so
much as a glance at the enemy with whom he was contending. Else, while
his arm was lifted to strike, he would stiffen into stone, and stand
with that uplifted arm for centuries, until time, and the wind and
weather, should crumble him quite away. This would be a very sad thing
to befall a young man who wanted to perform a great many brave deeds,
and to enjoy a great deal of happiness, in this bright and beautiful
world.

So disconsolate did these thoughts make him, that Perseus could not bear
to tell his mother what he had undertaken to do. He therefore took his
shield, girded on his sword, and crossed over from the island to the
mainland, where he sat down in a solitary place, and hardly refrained
from shedding tears.

But, while he was in this sorrowful mood, he heard a voice close beside
him.

"Perseus," said the voice, "why are you sad?"

He lifted his head from his hands, in which he had hidden it, and,
behold! all alone as Perseus had supposed himself to be, there was a
stranger in the solitary place. It was a brisk, intelligent, and
remarkably shrewd-looking young man, with a cloak over his shoulders, an
odd sort of cap on his head, a strangely twisted staff in his hand, and
a short and very crooked sword hanging by his side. He was exceedingly
light and active in his figure, like a person much accustomed to
gymnastic exercises, and well able to leap or run. Above all, the
stranger had such a cheerful, knowing, and helpful aspect (though it was
certainly a little mischievous, into the bargain), that Perseus could
not help feeling his spirits grow livelier as he gazed at him. Besides,
being really a courageous youth, he felt greatly ashamed that anybody
should have found him with tears in his eyes, like a timid little
schoolboy, when, after all, there might be no occasion for despair. So
Perseus wiped his eyes, and answered the stranger pretty briskly,
putting on as brave a look as he could.

"I am not so very sad," said he, "only thoughtful about an adventure
that I have undertaken."

"Oho!" answered the stranger. "Well, tell me all about it, and possibly
I may be of service to you. I have helped a good many young men through
adventures that looked difficult enough beforehand. Perhaps you may have
heard of me. I have more names than one; but the name of Quicksilver
suits me as well as any other. Tell me what the trouble is, and we will
talk the matter over, and see what can be done."

The stranger's words and manner put Perseus into quite a different mood
from his former one. He resolved to tell Quicksilver all his
difficulties, since he could not easily be worse off than he already
was, and, very possibly, his new friend might give him some advice that
would turn out well in the end. So he let the stranger know, in few
words, precisely what the case was,--how that King Polydectes wanted the
head of Medusa with the snaky locks as a bridal gift for the beautiful
Princess Hippodamia, and how that he had undertaken to get it for him,
but was afraid of being turned into stone.

"And that would be a great pity," said Quicksilver, with his mischievous
smile. "You would make a very handsome marble statue, it is true, and it
would be a considerable number of centuries before you crumbled away;
but, on the whole, one would rather be a young man for a few years, than
a stone image for a great many."

"Oh, far rather!" exclaimed Perseus, with the tears again standing in
his eyes. "And, besides, what would my dear mother do, if her beloved
son were turned into a stone?"

"Well, well, let us hope that the affair will not turn out so very
badly," replied Quicksilver, in an encouraging tone. "I am the very
person to help you, if anybody can. My sister and myself will do our
utmost to bring you safe through the adventure, ugly as it now looks."

"Your sister?" repeated Perseus.

"Yes, my sister," said the stranger. "She is very wise, I promise you;
and as for myself, I generally have all my wits about me, such as they
are. If you show yourself bold and cautious, and follow our advice, you
need not fear being a stone image yet awhile. But, first of all, you
must polish your shield, till you can see your face in it as distinctly
as in a mirror."

This seemed to Perseus rather an odd beginning of the adventure; for he
thought it of far more consequence that the shield should be strong
enough to defend him from the Gorgon's brazen claws, than that it should
be bright enough to show him the reflection of his face. However,
concluding that Quicksilver knew better than himself, he immediately set
to work, and scrubbed the shield with so much diligence and good-will,
that it very quickly shone like the moon at harvest time. Quicksilver
looked at it with a smile, and nodded his approbation. Then, taking off
his own short and crooked sword, he girded it about Perseus, instead of
the one which he had before worn.

"No sword but mine will answer your purpose," observed he; "the blade
has a most excellent temper, and will cut through iron and brass as
easily as through the slenderest twig. And now we will set out. The next
thing is to find the Three Gray Women, who will tell us where to find
the Nymphs."

"The Three Gray Women!" cried Perseus, to whom this seemed only a new
difficulty in the path of his adventure; "pray who may the Three Gray
Women be? I never heard of them before."

"They are three very strange old ladies," said Quicksilver, laughing.
"They have but one eye among them, and only one tooth. Moreover, you
must find them out by starlight, or in the dusk of the evening; for they
never show themselves by the light either of the sun or moon."

"But," said Perseus, "why should I waste my time with these Three Gray
Women? Would it not be better to set out at once in search of the
terrible Gorgons?"

"No, no," answered his friend. "There are other things to be done,
before you can find your way to the Gorgons. There is nothing for it but
to hunt up these old ladies; and when we meet with them, you may be sure
that the Gorgons are not a great way off. Come, let us be stirring!"

Perseus, by this time, felt so much confidence in his companion's
sagacity, that he made no more objections, and professed himself ready
to begin the adventure immediately. They accordingly set out, and walked
at a pretty brisk pace; so brisk, indeed, that Perseus found it rather
difficult to keep up with his nimble friend Quicksilver. To say the
truth, he had a singular idea that Quicksilver was furnished with a pair
of winged shoes, which, of course, helped him along marvellously. And
then, too, when Perseus looked sideways at him out of the corner of his
eye, he seemed to see wings on the side of his head; although, if he
turned a full gaze, there were no such things to be perceived, but only
an odd kind of cap. But, at all events, the twisted staff was evidently
a great convenience to Quicksilver, and enabled him to proceed so fast,
that Perseus, though a remarkably active young man, began to be out of
breath.

"Here!" cried Quicksilver, at last--for he knew well enough, rogue that
he was, how hard Perseus found it to keep pace with him--"take you the
staff, for you need it a great deal more than I. Are there no better
walkers than yourself in the island of Seriphus?"

"I could walk pretty well," said Perseus, glancing slyly at his
companion's feet, "if I had only a pair of winged shoes."

"We must see about getting you a pair," answered Quicksilver.

But the staff helped Perseus along so bravely, that he no longer felt
the slightest weariness. In fact, the stick seemed to be alive in his
hand, and to lend some of its life to Perseus. He and Quicksilver now
walked onward at their ease, talking very sociably together; and
Quicksilver told so many pleasant stories about his former adventures,
and how well his wits had served him on various occasions, that Perseus
began to think him a very wonderful person. He evidently knew the world;
and nobody is so charming to a young man as a friend who has that kind
of knowledge. Perseus listened the more eagerly, in the hope of
brightening his own wits by what he heard.

At last, he happened to recollect that Quicksilver had spoken of a
sister, who was to lend her assistance in the adventure which they were
now bound upon.

"Where is she?" he inquired. "Shall we not meet her soon?"

"All at the proper time," said his companion. "But this sister of mine,
you must understand, is quite a different sort of character from myself.
She is very grave and prudent, seldom smiles, never laughs, and makes it
a rule not to utter a word unless she has something particularly
profound to say. Neither will she listen to any but the wisest
conversation."

"Dear me!" ejaculated Perseus; "I shall be afraid to say a syllable."

"She is a very accomplished person, I assure you," continued
Quicksilver, "and has all the arts and sciences at her fingers' ends. In
short, she is so immoderately wise, that many people call her wisdom
personified. But, to tell you the truth, she has hardly vivacity enough
for my taste; and I think you would scarcely find her so pleasant a
travelling companion as myself. She has her good points, nevertheless;
and you will find the benefit of them, in your encounter with the
Gorgons."

By this time it had grown quite dusk. They were now come to a very wild
and desert place, overgrown with shaggy bushes, and so silent and
solitary that nobody seemed ever to have dwelt or journeyed there. All
was waste and desolate, in the gray twilight, which grew every moment
more obscure. Perseus looked about him, rather disconsolately, and asked
Quicksilver whether they had a great deal farther to go.

"Hist! hist!" whispered his companion. "Make no noise! This is just the
time and place to meet the Three Gray Women. Be careful that they do not
see you before you see them; for, though they have but a single eye
among the three, it is as sharp sighted as half a dozen common eyes."

"But what must I do," asked Perseus, "when we meet them?"

Quicksilver explained to Perseus how the Three Gray Women managed with
their one eye. They were in the habit, it seems, of changing it from one
to another, as if it had been a pair of spectacles, or--which would have
suited them better--a quizzing glass. When one of the three had kept the
eye a certain time, she took it out of the socket and passed it to one
of her sisters, whose turn it might happen to be, and who immediately
clapped it into her own head, and enjoyed a peep at the visible world.
Thus it will easily be understood that only one of the Three Gray Women
could see, while the other two were in utter darkness; and, moreover, at
the instant when the eye was passing from hand to hand, neither of the
poor old ladies was able to see a wink. I have heard of a great many
strange things, in my day, and have witnessed not a few; but none, it
seems to me, that can compare with the oddity of these Three Gray Women,
all peeping through a single eye.

So thought Perseus, likewise, and was so astonished that he almost
fancied his companion was joking with him, and that there were no such
old women in the world.

"You will soon find whether I tell the truth or no," observed
Quicksilver. "Hark! hush! hist! hist! There they come, now!"

Perseus looked earnestly through the dusk of the evening, and there,
sure enough, at no great distance off, he descried the Three Gray Women.
The light being so faint, he could not well make out what sort of
figures they were; only he discovered that they had long gray hair; and,
as they came nearer, he saw that two of them had but the empty socket of
an eye, in the middle of their foreheads. But, in the middle of the
third sister's forehead, there was a very large, bright, and piercing
eye, which sparkled like a great diamond in a ring; and so penetrating
did it seem to be, that Perseus could not help thinking it must possess
the gift of seeing in the darkest midnight just as perfectly as at
noonday. The sight of three persons' eyes was melted and collected into
that single one.

Thus the three old dames got along about as comfortably, upon the whole,
as if they could all see at once. She who chanced to have the eye in her
forehead led the other two by the hands, peeping sharply about her, all
the while; insomuch that Perseus dreaded lest she should see right
through the thick clump of bushes behind which he and Quicksilver had
hidden themselves. My stars! it was positively terrible to be within
reach of so very sharp an eye!

But, before they reached the clump of bushes, one of the Three Gray
Women spoke.

"Sister! Sister Scarecrow!" cried she, "you have had the eye long
enough. It is my turn now!"

"Let me keep it a moment longer, Sister Nightmare," answered Scarecrow.
"I thought I had a glimpse of something behind that thick bush."

"Well, and what of that?" retorted Nightmare, peevishly. "Can't I see
into a thick bush as easily as yourself? The eye is mine as well as
yours; and I know the use of it as well as you, or maybe a little
better. I insist upon taking a peep immediately!"

But here the third sister, whose name was Shakejoint, began to complain,
and said that it was her turn to have the eye, and that Scarecrow and
Nightmare wanted to keep it all to themselves. To end the dispute, old
Dame Scarecrow took the eye out of her forehead, and held it forth in
her hand.

"Take it, one of you," cried she, "and quit this foolish quarrelling.
For my part, I shall be glad of a little thick darkness. Take it
quickly, however, or I must clap it into my own head again!"

Accordingly, both Nightmare and Shakejoint put out their hands, groping
eagerly to snatch the eye out of the hand of Scarecrow. But, being both
alike blind, they could not easily find where Scarecrow's hand was; and
Scarecrow, being now just as much in the dark as Shakejoint and
Nightmare, could not at once meet either of their hands, in order to put
the eye into it. Thus (as you will see, with half an eye, my wise little
auditors), these good old dames had fallen into a strange perplexity.
For, though the eye shone and glistened like a star, as Scarecrow held
it out, yet the Gray Women caught not the least glimpse of its light,
and were all three in utter darkness, from too impatient a desire to
see.

Quicksilver was so much tickled at beholding Shakejoint and Nightmare
both groping for the eye, and each finding fault with Scarecrow and one
another, that he could scarcely help laughing aloud.

"Now is your time!" he whispered to Perseus. "Quick, quick! before they
can clap the eye into either of their heads. Rush out upon the old
ladies, and snatch it from Scarecrow's hand!"

In an instant, while the Three Gray Women were still scolding each
other, Perseus leaped from behind the clump of bushes, and made himself
master of the prize. The marvellous eye, as he held it in his hand,
shone very brightly, and seemed to look up into his face with a knowing
air, and an expression as if it would have winked, had it been provided
with a pair of eyelids for that purpose. But the Gray Women knew nothing
of what had happened; and, each supposing that one of her sisters was in
possession of the eye, they began their quarrel anew. At last, as
Perseus did not wish to put these respectable dames to greater
inconvenience than was really necessary, he thought it right to explain
the matter.

"My good ladies," said he, "pray do not be angry with one another. If
anybody is in fault, it is myself; for I have the honour to hold your
very brilliant and excellent eye in my own hand!"

"You! you have our eye! And who are you?" screamed the Three Gray Women,
all in a breath; for they were terribly frightened, of course, at
hearing a strange voice, and discovering that their eyesight had got
into the hands of they could not guess whom. "Oh, what shall we do,
sisters? what shall we do? We are all in the dark! Give us our eye! Give
us our one, precious, solitary eye! You have two of your own! Give us
our eye!"

"Tell them," whispered Quicksilver to Perseus, "that they shall have
back the eye as soon as they direct you where to find the Nymphs who
have the flying slippers, the magic wallet, and the helmet of darkness."

"My dear, good, admirable old ladies," said Perseus, addressing the Gray
Women, "there is no occasion for putting yourselves into such a fright.
I am by no means a bad young man. You shall have back your eye, safe and
sound, and as bright as ever, the moment you tell me where to find the
Nymphs."

"The Nymphs! Goodness me! sisters, what Nymphs does he mean?" screamed
Scarecrow. "There are a great many Nymphs, people say; some that go a
hunting in the woods, and some that live inside of trees, and some that
have a comfortable home in fountains of water. We know nothing at all
about them. We are three unfortunate old souls, that go wandering about
in the dusk, and never had but one eye amongst us, and that one you have
stolen away. Oh, give it back, good stranger!--whoever you are, give it
back!"

All this while the Three Gray Women were groping with their outstretched
hands, and trying their utmost to get hold of Perseus. But he took good
care to keep out of their reach.

"My respectable dames," said he--for his mother had taught him always to
use the greatest civility--"I hold your eye fast in my hand, and shall
keep it safely for you, until you please to tell me where to find these
Nymphs. The Nymphs, I mean, who keep the enchanted wallet, the flying
slippers, and the what is it?--the helmet of invisibility."

"Mercy on us, sisters! what is the young man talking about?" exclaimed
Scarecrow, Nightmare and Shakejoint, one to another, with great
appearance of astonishment. "A pair of flying slippers, quoth he! His
heels would quickly fly higher than his head, if he was silly enough to
put them on. And a helmet of invisibility! How could a helmet make him
invisible, unless it were big enough for him to hide under it? And an
enchanted wallet! What sort of a contrivance may that be, I wonder? No,
no, good stranger! we can tell you nothing of these marvellous things.
You have two eyes of your own, and we have but a single one amongst us
three. You can find out such wonders better than three blind old
creatures, like us."

Perseus, hearing them talk in this way, began really to think that the
Gray Women knew nothing of the matter; and, as it grieved him to have
put them to so much trouble, he was just on the point of restoring their
eye and asking pardon for his rudeness in snatching it away. But
Quicksilver caught his hand.

"Don't let them make a fool of you!" said he. "These Three Gray Women
are the only persons in the world that can tell you where to find the
Nymphs; and, unless you get that information, you will never succeed in
cutting off the head of Medusa with the snaky locks. Keep fast hold of
the eye, and all will go well."

As it turned out, Quicksilver was in the right. There are but few things
that people prize so much as they do their eyesight; and the Gray Women
valued their single eye as highly as if it had been half a dozen, which
was the number they ought to have had. Finding that there was no other
way of recovering it, they at last told Perseus what he wanted to know.
No sooner had they done so, than he immediately, and with the utmost
respect, clapped the eye into the vacant socket in one of their
foreheads, thanked them for their kindness, and bade them farewell.
Before the young man was out of hearing, however, they had got into a
new dispute, because he happened to have given the eye to Scarecrow, who
had already taken her turn of it when their trouble with Perseus
commenced.

It is greatly to be feared that the Three Gray Women were very much in
the habit of disturbing their mutual harmony by bickerings of this sort;
which was the more pity, as they could not conveniently do without one
another, and were evidently intended to be inseparable companions. As a
general rule, I would advise all people, whether sisters or brothers,
old or young, who chance to have but one eye amongst them, to cultivate
forbearance, and not all insist upon peeping through it at once.

Quicksilver and Perseus, in the meantime, were making the best of their
way in quest of the Nymphs. The old dames had given them such particular
directions that they were not long in finding them out. They proved to
be very different persons from Nightmare, Shakejoint and Scarecrow; for,
instead of being old, they were young and beautiful; and instead of one
eye amongst the sisterhood, each Nymph had two exceedingly bright eyes
of her own, with which she looked very kindly at Perseus. They seemed to
be acquainted with Quicksilver; and, when he told them the adventure
which Perseus had undertaken, they made no difficulty about giving him
the valuable articles that were in their custody. In the first place,
they brought out what appeared to be a small purse, made of deer skin,
and curiously embroidered, and bade him be sure and keep it safe. This
was the magic wallet. The Nymphs next produced a pair of shoes, or
slippers, or sandals, with a nice little pair of wings at the heel of
each.

"Put them on, Perseus," said Quicksilver. "You will find yourself as
light heeled as you can desire for the remainder of our journey."

So Perseus proceeded to put one of the slippers on, while he laid the
other on the ground by his side. Unexpectedly, however, this other
slipper spread its wings, fluttered up off the ground, and would
probably have flown away, if Quicksilver had not made a leap, and
luckily caught it in the air.

"Be more careful," said he, as he gave it back to Perseus. "It would
frighten the birds, up aloft, if they should see a flying slipper
amongst them."

When Perseus had got on both of these wonderful slippers, he was
altogether too buoyant to tread on earth. Making a step or two, lo and
behold! upward he popped into the air, high above the heads of
Quicksilver and the Nymphs, and found it very difficult to clamber down
again. Winged slippers, and all such high-flying contrivances, are
seldom quite easy to manage until one grows a little accustomed to them.
Quicksilver laughed at his companion's involuntary activity, and told
him that he must not be in so desperate a hurry, but must wait for the
invisible helmet.

The good-natured Nymphs had the helmet, with its dark tuft of waving
plumes, all in readiness to put upon his head. And now there happened
about as wonderful an incident as anything that I have yet told you.
The instant before the helmet was put on, there stood Perseus, a
beautiful young man, with golden ringlets and rosy cheeks, the crooked
sword by his side, and the brightly polished shield upon his arm--a
figure that seemed all made up of courage, sprightliness, and glorious
light. But when the helmet had descended over his white brow, there was
no longer any Perseus to be seen! Nothing but empty air! Even the
helmet, that covered him with its invisibility, had vanished!

"Where are you, Perseus?" asked Quicksilver.

"Why, here, to be sure!" answered Perseus, very quietly, although his
voice seemed to come out of the transparent atmosphere. "Just where I
was a moment ago. Don't you see me?"

"No, indeed!" answered his friend. "You are hidden under the helmet.
But, if I cannot see you, neither can the Gorgons. Follow me, therefore,
and we will try your dexterity in using the winged slippers."

With these words, Quicksilver's cap spread its wings, as if his head
were about to fly away from his shoulders; but his whole figure rose
lightly into the air, and Perseus followed. By the time they had
ascended a few hundred feet, the young man began to feel what a
delightful thing it was to leave the dull earth so far beneath him, and
to be able to flit about like a bird.

It was now deep night. Perseus looked upward, and saw the round, bright,
silvery moon, and thought that he should desire nothing better than to
soar up thither, and spend his life there. Then he looked downward
again, and saw the earth, with its seas and lakes, and the silver
courses of its rivers, and its snowy mountain peaks, and the breadth of
its fields, and the dark cluster of its woods, and its cities of white
marble; and, with the moonshine sleeping over the whole scene, it was as
beautiful as the moon or any star could be. And, among other objects, he
saw the island of Seriphus, where his dear mother was. Sometimes he and
Quicksilver approached a cloud, that, at a distance, looked as if it
were made of fleecy silver; although, when they plunged into it, they
found themselves chilled and moistened with gray mist. So swift was
their flight, however, that, in an instant, they emerged from the cloud
into the moonlight again. Once, a high-soaring eagle flew right against
the invisible Perseus. The bravest sights were the meteors, that gleamed
suddenly out, as if a bonfire had been kindled in the sky, and made the
moonshine pale for as much as a hundred miles around them.

As the two companions flew onward, Perseus fancied that he could hear
the rustle of a garment close by his side; and it was on the side
opposite to the one where he beheld Quicksilver, yet only Quicksilver
was visible.

"Whose garment is this," inquired Perseus, "that keeps rustling close
beside me in the breeze?"

"Oh, it is my sister's!" answered Quicksilver. "She is coming along with
us, as I told you she would. We could do nothing without the help of my
sister. You have no idea how wise she is. She has such eyes, too! Why,
she can see you, at this moment, just as distinctly as if you were not
invisible; and I'll venture to say, she will be the first to discover
the Gorgons."

By this time, in their swift voyage through the air, they had come
within sight of the great ocean, and were soon flying over it. Far
beneath them, the waves tossed themselves tumultuously in mid-sea, or
rolled a white surf line upon the long beaches, or foamed against the
rocky cliffs, with a roar that was thunderous, in the lower world;
although it became a gentle murmur, like the voice of a baby half
asleep, before it reached the ears of Perseus. Just then a voice spoke
in the air close by him. It seemed to be a woman's voice, and was
melodious, though not exactly what might be called sweet, but grave and
mild.

"Perseus," said the voice, "there are the Gorgons."

"Where?" exclaimed Perseus. "I cannot see them."

"On the shore of that island beneath you," replied the voice. "A pebble,
dropped from your hand, would strike in the midst of them."

"I told you she would be the first to discover them," said Quicksilver
to Perseus. "And there they are!"

Straight downward, two or three thousand feet below him, Perseus
perceived a small island, with the sea breaking into white foam all
around its rocky shore, except on one side, where there was a beach of
snowy sand. He descended toward it, and, looking earnestly at a cluster
or heap of brightness, at the foot of a precipice of black rocks,
behold, there were the terrible Gorgons! They lay fast asleep, soothed
by the thunder of the sea; for it required a tumult that would have
deafened everybody else to lull such fierce creatures into slumber. The
moonlight glistened on their steely scales, and on their golden wings,
which drooped idly over the sand. Their brazen claws, horrible to look
at, were thrust out, and clutched the wave-beaten fragments of rock,
while the sleeping Gorgons dreamed of tearing some poor mortal all to
pieces. The snakes that served them instead of hair seemed likewise to
be asleep; although, now and then, one would writhe, and lift its head,
and thrust out its forked tongue, emitting a drowsy hiss, and then let
itself subside among its sister snakes.

The Gorgons were more like an awful, gigantic kind of insect--immense,
golden-winged beetles, or dragon-flies, or things of that sort--at once
ugly and beautiful--than like anything else; only that they were a
thousand and a million times as big. And, with all this, there was
something partly human about them, too. Luckily for Perseus, their faces
were completely hidden from him by the posture in which they lay; for,
had he but looked one instant at them, he would have fallen heavily out
of the air, an image of senseless stone.

"Now," whispered Quicksilver, as he hovered by the side of Perseus--"now
is your time to do the deed! Be quick; for, if one of the Gorgons should
awake, you are too late!"

"Which shall I strike at?" asked Perseus, drawing his sword and
descending a little lower. "They all three look alike. All three have
snaky locks. Which of the three is Medusa?"

It must be understood that Medusa was the only one of these dragon
monsters whose head Perseus could possibly cut off. As for the other
two, let him have the sharpest sword that ever was forged, and he might
have hacked away by the hour together, without doing them the least
harm.

"Be cautious," said the calm voice which had before spoken to him. "One
of the Gorgons is stirring in her sleep, and is just about to turn over.
That is Medusa. Do not look at her! The sight would turn you to stone!
Look at the reflection of her face and figure in the bright mirror of
your shield."

Perseus now understood Quicksilver's motive for so earnestly exhorting
him to polish his shield. In its surface he could safely look at the
reflection of the Gorgon's face. And there it was--that terrible
countenance--mirrored in the brightness of the shield, with the
moonlight falling over it, and displaying all its horror. The snakes,
whose venomous natures could not altogether sleep, kept twisting
themselves over the forehead. It was the fiercest and most horrible face
that ever was seen or imagined, and yet with a strange, fearful, and
savage kind of beauty in it. The eyes were closed, and the Gorgon was
still in a deep slumber; but there was an unquiet expression disturbing
her features, as if the monster was troubled with an ugly dream. She
gnashed her white tusks, and dug into the sand with her brazen claws.

The snakes, too, seemed to feel Medusa's dream, and to be made more
restless by it. They twined themselves into tumultuous knots, writhed
fiercely, and uplifted a hundred hissing heads, without opening their
eyes.

"Now, now!" whispered Quicksilver, who was growing impatient. "Make a
dash at the monster!"

"But be calm," said the grave, melodious voice at the young man's side.
"Look in your shield, as you fly downward, and take care that you do not
miss your first stroke."

Perseus flew cautiously downward, still keeping his eyes on Medusa's
face, as reflected in his shield. The nearer he came, the more terrible
did the snaky visage and metallic body of the monster grow. At last,
when he found himself hovering over her within arm's length, Perseus
uplifted his sword, while, at the same instant, each separate snake upon
the Gorgon's head stretched threateningly upward, and Medusa unclosed
her eyes. But she awoke too late. The sword was sharp; the stroke fell
like a lightning flash; and the head of the wicked Medusa tumbled from
her body!

"Admirably done!" cried Quicksilver. "Make haste, and clap the head into
your magic wallet."

To the astonishment of Perseus, the small, embroidered wallet, which he
had hung about his neck, and which had hitherto been no bigger than a
purse, grew all at once large enough to contain Medusa's head. As quick
as thought, he snatched it up, with the snakes still writhing upon it,
and thrust it in.

"Your task is done," said the calm voice. "Now fly; for the other
Gorgons will do their utmost to take vengeance for Medusa's death."

It was, indeed, necessary to take flight; for Perseus had not done the
deed so quietly but that the clash of his sword, and the hissing of the
snakes, and the thump of Medusa's head as it tumbled upon the sea-beaten
sand, awoke the other two monsters. There they sat, for an instant,
sleepily rubbing their eyes with their brazen fingers, while all the
snakes on their heads reared themselves on end with surprise, and with
venomous malice against they knew not what. But when the Gorgons saw the
scaly carcass of Medusa, headless, and her golden wings all ruffled and
half spread out on the sand, it was really awful to hear what yells and
screeches they set up. And then the snakes! They sent forth a
hundredfold hiss, with one consent, and Medusa's snakes answered them
out of the magic wallet.

No sooner were the Gorgons broad awake than they hurtled upward into the
air, brandishing their brass talons, gnashing their horrible tusks, and
flapping their huge wings so wildly, that some of the golden feathers
were shaken out, and floated down upon the shore. And there, perhaps,
those very feathers lie scattered till this day. Up rose the Gorgons, as
I tell you, staring horribly about, in hopes of turning somebody to
stone. Had Perseus looked them in the face, or had he fallen into their
clutches, his poor mother would never have kissed her boy again! But he
took good care to turn his eyes another way; and, as he wore the helmet
of invisibility, the Gorgons knew not in what direction to follow him;
nor did he fail to make the best use of the winged slippers, by soaring
upward a perpendicular mile or so. At that height, when the screams of
those abominable creatures sounded faintly beneath him, he made a
straight course for the island of Seriphus, in order to carry Medusa's
head to King Polydectes.

I have no time to tell you of several marvellous things that befell
Perseus on his way homeward; such as his killing a hideous sea monster,
just as it was on the point of devouring a beautiful maiden; nor how he
changed an enormous giant into a mountain of stone, merely by showing
him the head of the Gorgon. If you doubt this latter story, you may make
a voyage to Africa, some day or other, and see the very mountain, which
is still known by the ancient giant's name.

Finally, our brave Perseus arrived at the island, where he expected to
see his dear mother. But, during his absence, the wicked king had
treated Danaë so very ill that she was compelled to make her escape, and
had taken refuge in a temple, where some good old priests were extremely
kind to her. These praiseworthy priests, and the kind-hearted fisherman,
who had first shown hospitality to Danaë and little Perseus when he
found them afloat in the chest, seem to have been the only persons on
the island who cared about doing right. All the rest of the people, as
well as King Polydectes himself, were remarkably ill behaved, and
deserved no better destiny than that which was now to happen.

Not finding his mother at home, Perseus went straight to the palace, and
was immediately ushered into the presence of the king. Polydectes was by
no means rejoiced to see him; for he had felt almost certain, in his own
evil mind, that the Gorgons would have torn the poor young man to
pieces, and have eaten him up, out of the way. However, seeing him
safely returned, he put the best face he could upon the matter and asked
Perseus how he had succeeded.

"Have you performed your promise?" inquired he. "Have you brought me the
head of Medusa with the snaky locks? If not, young man, it will cost you
dear; for I must have a bridal present for the beautiful Princess
Hippodamia, and there is nothing else that she would admire so much."

"Yes, please Your Majesty," answered Perseus, in a quiet way, as if it
were no very wonderful deed for such a young man as he to perform. "I
have brought you the Gorgon's head, snaky locks and all!"

"Indeed! Pray let me see it," quoth King Polydectes. "It must be a very
curious spectacle, if all that travellers tell about it be true!"

"Your Majesty is in the right," replied Perseus. "It is really an object
that will be pretty certain to fix the regards of all who look at it.
And, if Your Majesty think fit, I would suggest that a holiday be
proclaimed, and that all Your Majesty's subjects be summoned to behold
this wonderful curiosity. Few of them, I imagine, have seen a Gorgon's
head before, and perhaps never may again!"

The king well knew that his subjects were an idle set of reprobates, and
very fond of sightseeing, as idle persons usually are. So he took the
young man's advice, and sent out heralds and messengers, in all
directions, to blow the trumpet at the street corners, and in the market
places, and wherever two roads met, and summon everybody to court.
Thither, accordingly, came a great multitude of good-for-nothing
vagabonds, all of whom, out of pure love of mischief, would have been
glad if Perseus had met with some ill-hap in his encounter with the
Gorgons. If there were any better people in the island (as I really hope
there may have been, although the story tells nothing about any such),
they stayed quietly at home, minding their business, and taking care of
their little children. Most of the inhabitants, at all events, ran as
fast as they could to the palace, and shoved, and pushed, and elbowed
one another in their eagerness to get near a balcony, on which Perseus
showed himself, holding the embroidered wallet in his hand.

On a platform, within full view of the balcony, sat the mighty King
Polydectes, amid his evil counsellors, and with his flattering courtiers
in a semi-circle round about him. Monarch, counsellors, courtiers, and
subjects, all gazed eagerly toward Perseus.

"Show us the head! Show us the head!" shouted the people; and there was
a fierceness in their cry as if they would tear Perseus to pieces,
unless he should satisfy them with what he had to show. "Show us the
head of Medusa with the snaky locks!"

A feeling of sorrow and pity came over the youthful Perseus.

"O King Polydectes," cried he, "and ye many people, I am very loath to
show you the Gorgon's head!"

"Ah, the villain and coward!" yelled the people, more fiercely than
before. "He is making game of us! He has no Gorgon's head! Show us the
head if you have it, or we will take your own head for a football!"

The evil counsellors whispered bad advice in the king's ear; the
courtiers murmured, with one consent, that Perseus had shown disrespect
to their royal lord and master; and the great King Polydectes himself
waved his hand, and ordered him, with the stern, deep voice of
authority, on his peril, to produce the head.

"Show me the Gorgon's head, or I will cut off your own!"

And Perseus sighed.

"This instant," repeated Polydectes, "or you die!"

"Behold it then!" cried Perseus, in a voice like the blast of a trumpet.

And, suddenly holding up the head, not an eyelid had time to wink before
the wicked King Polydectes, his evil counsellors, and all his fierce
subjects were no longer anything but the mere images of a monarch and
his people. They were all fixed, forever, in the look and attitude of
that moment! At the first glimpse of the terrible head of Medusa, they
whitened into marble! And Perseus thrust the head back into his wallet,
and went to tell his dear mother that she need no longer be afraid of
the wicked King Polydectes.




CHAPTER VI

THE DRAGON'S TEETH


Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix, the three sons of King Agenor, and their
little sister Europa (who was a very beautiful child) were at play
together, near the seashore, in their father's kingdom of Phœnicia.
They had rambled to some distance from the palace where their parents
dwelt, and were now in a verdant meadow, on one side of which lay the
sea, all sparkling and dimpling in the sunshine, and murmuring gently
against the beach. The three boys were very happy, gathering flowers,
and twining them into garlands, with which they adorned the little
Europa. Seated on the grass, the child was almost hidden under an
abundance of buds and blossoms, whence her rosy face peeped merrily out,
and, as Cadmus said, was the prettiest of all the flowers.

Just then, there came a splendid butterfly, fluttering along the meadow;
and Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix set off in pursuit of it, crying out
that it was a flower with wings. Europa, who was a little wearied with
playing all day long, did not chase the butterfly with her brothers, but
sat still where they had left her, and closed her eyes. For a while, she
listened to the pleasant murmur of the sea, which was like a voice
saying "Hush!" and bidding her go to sleep. But the pretty child, if she
slept at all, could not have slept more than a moment, when she heard
something trample on the grass, not far from her, and peeping out from
the heap of flowers, beheld a snow-white bull.

And whence could this bull have come? Europa and her brothers had been a
long time playing in the meadow, and had seen no cattle, nor other
living thing, either there or on the neighbouring hills.

"Brother Cadmus!" cried Europa, starting up out of the midst of the
roses and lilies. "Phœnix! Cilix! Where are you all? Help! Help! Come
and drive away this bull!"

But her brothers were too far off to hear; especially as the fright took
away Europa's voice, and hindered her from calling very loudly. So there
she stood, with her pretty mouth wide open, as pale as the white lilies
that were twisted among the other flowers in her garlands.

Nevertheless, it was the suddenness with which she had perceived the
bull, rather than anything frightful in his appearance, that caused
Europa so much alarm. On looking at him more attentively, she began to
see that he was a beautiful animal, and even fancied a particularly
amiable expression in his face. As for his breath--the breath of cattle,
you know, is always sweet--it was as fragrant as if he had been grazing
on no other food than rosebuds, or, at least, the most delicate of
clover blossoms. Never before did a bull have such bright and tender
eyes, and such smooth horns of ivory, as this one. And the bull ran
little races, and capered sportively around the child; so that she quite
forgot how big and strong he was, and, from the gentleness and
playfulness of his actions, soon came to consider him as innocent a
creature as a pet lamb.

Thus, frightened as she at first was, you might by and by have seen
Europa stroking the bull's forehead with her small white hand, and
taking the garlands off her own head to hang them on his neck and ivory
horns. Then she pulled up some blades of grass, and he ate them out of
her hand, not as if he were hungry, but because he wanted to be friends
with the child, and took pleasure in eating what she had touched. Well,
my stars! was there ever such a gentle, sweet, pretty, and amiable
creature as this bull, and ever such a nice playmate for a little girl?

When the animal saw (for the bull had so much intelligence that it is
really wonderful to think of), when he saw that Europa was no longer
afraid of him, he grew overjoyed, and could hardly contain himself for
delight. He frisked about the meadow, now here, now there, making
sprightly leaps, with as little effort as a bird expends in hopping from
twig to twig. Indeed, his motion was as light as if he were flying
through the air, and his hoofs seemed hardly to leave their print in the
grassy soil over which he trod. With his spotless hue, he resembled a
snowdrift, wafted along by the wind. Once he galloped so far away that
Europa feared lest she might never see him again; so, setting up her
childish voice, she called him back.

"Come back, pretty creature!" she cried. "Here is a nice clover
blossom."

And then it was delightful to witness the gratitude of this amiable
bull, and how he was so full of joy and thankfulness that he capered
higher than ever. He came running, and bowed his head before Europa, as
if he knew her to be a king's daughter, or else recognised the important
truth that a little girl is everybody's queen. And not only did the bull
bend his neck, he absolutely knelt down at her feet, and made such
intelligent nods, and other inviting gestures, that Europa understood
what he meant just as well as if he had put it in so many words.

"Come, dear child," was what he wanted to say, "let me give you a ride
on my back."

At the first thought of such a thing, Europa drew back. But then she
considered in her wise little head that there could be no possible harm
in taking just one gallop on the back of this docile and friendly
animal, who would certainly set her down the very instant she desired
it. And how it would surprise her brothers to see her riding across the
green meadow! And what merry times they might have, either taking turns
for a gallop, or clambering on the gentle creature, all four children
together, and careering round the field with shouts of laughter that
would be heard as far off as King Agenor's palace!

"I think I will do it," said the child to herself.

And, indeed, why not? She cast a glance around, and caught a glimpse of
Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix, who were still in pursuit of the
butterfly, almost at the other end of the meadow. It would be the
quickest way of rejoining them, to get upon the white bull's back. She
came a step nearer to him, therefore; and--sociable creature that he
was--he showed so much joy at this mark of her confidence, that the
child could not find it in her heart to hesitate any longer. Making one
bound (for this little princess was as active as a squirrel), there sat
Europa on the beautiful bull, holding an ivory horn in each hand, lest
she should fall off.

"Softly, pretty bull, softly!" she said, rather frightened at what she
had done. "Do not gallop too fast."

Having got the child on his back, the animal gave a leap into the air,
and came down so like a feather that Europa did not know when his hoofs
touched the ground. He then began a race to that part of the flowery
plain where her three brothers were, and where they had just caught
their splendid butterfly. Europa screamed with delight; and Phœnix,
Cilix, and Cadmus stood gaping at the spectacle of their sister mounted
on a white bull, not knowing whether to be frightened or to wish the
same good luck for themselves. The gentle and innocent creature (for who
could possibly doubt that he was so?) pranced round among the children
as sportively as a kitten. Europa all the while looked down upon her
brothers, nodding and laughing, but yet with a sort of stateliness in
her rosy little face. As the bull wheeled about to take another gallop
across the meadow, the child waved her hand, and said, "Good-by,"
playfully pretending that she was now bound on a distant journey, and
might not see her brothers again for nobody could tell how long.

"Good-by," shouted Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix, all in one breath.

But, together with her enjoyment of the sport, there was still a little
remnant of fear in the child's heart; so that her last look at the three
boys was a troubled one, and made them feel as if their dear sister were
really leaving them forever. And what do you think the snowy bull did
next? Why, he set off, as swift as the wind, straight down to the
seashore, scampered across the sand, took an airy leap, and plunged
right in among the foaming billows. The white spray rose in a shower
over him and little Europa, and fell spattering down upon the water.

Then what a scream of terror did the poor child send forth! The three
brothers screamed manfully, likewise, and ran to the shore as fast as
their legs would carry them, with Cadmus at their head. But it was too
late. When they reached the margin of the sand, the treacherous animal
was already far away in the wide blue sea, with only his snowy head and
tail emerging, and poor little Europa between them, stretching out one
hand toward her dear brothers, while she grasped the bull's ivory horn
with the other. And there stood Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix, gazing at
this sad spectacle, through their tears, until they could no longer
distinguish the bull's snowy head from the white-capped billows that
seemed to boil up out of the sea's depths around him. Nothing more was
ever seen of the white bull--nothing more of the beautiful child.

This was a mournful story, as you may well think, for the three boys to
carry home to their parents. King Agenor, their father, was the ruler of
the whole country; but he loved his little daughter Europa better than
his kingdom, or than all his other children, or than anything else in
the world. Therefore, when Cadmus and his two brothers came crying home,
and told him how that a white bull had carried off their sister, and
swam with her over the sea, the king was quite beside himself with grief
and rage. Although it was now twilight, and fast growing dark, he bade
them set out instantly in search of her.

"Never shall you see my face again," he cried, "unless you bring me back
my little Europa, to gladden me with her smiles and her pretty ways.
Begone, and enter my presence no more, till you come leading her by the
hand."

As King Agenor said this, his eyes flashed fire (for he was a very
passionate king), and he looked so terribly angry that the poor boys did
not even venture to ask for their suppers, but slunk away out of the
palace, and only paused on the steps a moment to consult whither they
should go first. While they were standing there, all in dismay, their
mother, Queen Telephassa (who happened not to be by when they told the
story to the king), came hurrying after them, and said that she, too,
would go in quest of her daughter.

"Oh no, mother!" cried the boys. "The night is dark, and there is no
knowing what troubles and perils we may meet with."

"Alas! my dear children," answered poor Queen Telephassa, weeping
bitterly, "that is only another reason why I should go with you. If I
should lose you, too, as well as my little Europa, what would become of
me?"

"And let me go likewise!" said their playfellow Thasus, who came running
to join them.

Thasus was the son of a seafaring person in the neighbourhood; he had
been brought up with the young princess, and was their intimate friend,
and loved Europa very much; so they consented that he should accompany
them. The whole party, therefore, set forth together; Cadmus, Phœnix,
Cilix and Thasus clustered round Queen Telephassa, grasping her skirts,
and begging her to lean upon their shoulders whenever she felt weary. In
this manner they went down the palace steps, and began a journey which
turned out to be a great deal longer than they dreamed of. The last that
they saw of King Agenor, he came to the door, with a servant holding a
torch beside him, and called after them into the gathering darkness:

"Remember! Never ascend these steps again without the child!"

"Never!" sobbed Queen Telephassa; and the three brothers and Thasus
answered, "Never! Never! Never! Never!"

And they kept their word. Year after year King Agenor sat in the
solitude of his beautiful palace, listening in vain for their returning
footsteps, hoping to hear the familiar voice of the queen, and the
cheerful talk of his sons and their playfellow Thasus, entering the
door together, and the sweet, childish accents of little Europa in the
midst of them. But so long a time went by, that, at last, if they had
really come, the king would not have known that this was the voice of
Telephassa, and these the younger voices that used to make such joyful
echoes when the children were playing about the palace. We must now
leave King Agenor to sit on his throne, and must go along with Queen
Telephassa and her four youthful companions.

They went on and on, and travelled a long way, and passed over mountains
and rivers, and sailed over seas. Here, and there, and everywhere, they
made continual inquiry if any person could tell them what had become of
Europa. The rustic people, of whom they asked this question, paused a
little while from their labours in the field, and looked very much
surprised. They thought it strange to behold a woman in the garb of a
queen (for Telephassa, in her haste, had forgotten to take off her crown
and her royal robes), roaming about the country, with four lads around
her, on such an errand as this seemed to be. But nobody could give them
any tidings of Europa; nobody had seen a little girl dressed like a
princess, and mounted on a snow-white bull, which galloped as swiftly as
the wind.

I cannot tell you how long Queen Telephassa, and Cadmus, Phœnix, and
Cilix, her three sons, and Thasus, their playfellow, went wandering
along the highways and bypaths, or through the pathless wildernesses of
the earth, in this manner. But certain it is, that, before they reached
any place of rest, their splendid garments were quite worn out. They all
looked very much travel stained, and would have had the dust of many
countries on their shoes, if the streams, through which they waded, had
not washed it all away. When they had been gone a year, Telephassa threw
away her crown, because it chafed her forehead.

"It has given me many a headache," said the poor queen, "and it cannot
cure my heartache."

As fast as their princely robes got torn and tattered, they exchanged
them for such mean attire as ordinary people wore. By and by they came
to have a wild and homeless aspect; so that you would much sooner have
taken them for a gypsy family than a queen and three princes, and a
young nobleman, who had once a palace for their home, and a train of
servants to do their bidding. The four boys grew up to be tall young
men, with sunburnt faces. Each of them girded on a sword, to defend
themselves against the perils of the way. When the husbandmen, at whose
farmhouses they sought hospitality, needed their assistance in the
harvest field, they gave it willingly; and Queen Telephassa (who had
done no work in her palace, save to braid silk threads with golden ones)
came behind them to bind the sheaves. If payment was offered, they shook
their heads, and only asked for tidings of Europa.

"There are bulls enough in my pasture," the old farmers would reply;
"but I never heard of one like this you tell me of. A snow-white bull
with a little princess on his back! Ho! ho! I ask your pardon, good
folks; but there never was such a sight seen hereabouts."

At last, when his upper lip began to have the down on it, Phœnix grew
weary of rambling hither and thither to no purpose. So, one day, when
they happened to be passing through a pleasant and solitary tract of
country, he sat himself down on a heap of moss.

"I can go no farther," said Phœnix. "It is a mere foolish waste of
life, to spend it, as we do, in always wandering up and down, and never
coming to any home at nightfall. Our sister is lost, and never will be
found. She probably perished in the sea; or, to whatever shore the white
bull may have carried her, it is now so many years ago, that there would
be neither love nor acquaintance between us should we meet again. My
father has forbidden us to return to his palace; so I shall build me a
hut of branches, and dwell here."

"Well, son Phœnix," said Telephassa, sorrowfully, "you have grown to
be a man, and must do as you judge best. But, for my part, I will still
go in quest of my poor child."

"And we three will go along with you!" cried Cadmus and Cilix, and their
faithful friend Thasus.

But, before setting out, they all helped Phœnix to build a
habitation. When completed, it was a sweet rural bower, roofed overhead
with an arch of living boughs. Inside there were two pleasant rooms, one
of which had a soft heap of moss for a bed, while the other was
furnished with a rustic seat or two, curiously fashioned out of the
crooked roots of trees. So comfortable and homelike did it seem, that
Telephassa and her three companions could not help sighing, to think
that they must still roam about the world, instead of spending the
remainder of their lives in some such cheerful abode as they had here
built for Phœnix. But, when they bade him farewell, Phœnix shed
tears, and probably regretted that he was no longer to keep them
company.

However, he had fixed upon an admirable place to dwell in. And by and by
there came other people, who chanced to have no homes; and, seeing how
pleasant a spot it was, they built themselves huts in the neighbourhood
of Phœnix's habitation. Thus, before many years went by, a city had
grown up there, in the centre of which was seen a stately palace of
marble, wherein dwelt Phœnix, clothed in a purple robe, and wearing a
golden crown upon his head. For the inhabitants of the new city, finding
that he had royal blood in his veins, had chosen him to be their king.
The very first decree of state which King Phœnix issued was, that if
a maiden happened to arrive in the kingdom, mounted on a snow-white
bull, and calling herself Europa, his subjects should treat her with the
greatest kindness and respect, and immediately bring her to the palace.
You may see, by this, that Phœnix's conscience never quite ceased to
trouble him, for giving up the quest of his dear sister, and sitting
himself down to be comfortable, while his mother and her companions went
onward.

But often and often, at the close of a weary day's journey, did
Telephassa and Cadmus, Cilix and Thasus, remember the pleasant spot in
which they had left Phœnix. It was a sorrowful prospect for these
wanderers, that on the morrow they must again set forth, and that, after
many nightfalls, they would perhaps be no nearer the close of their
toilsome pilgrimage than now. These thoughts made them all melancholy at
times, but appeared to torment Cilix more than the rest of the party. At
length, one morning, when they were taking their staffs in hand to set
out, he thus addressed them:

"My dear mother, and you good brother Cadmus, and my friend Thasus,
methinks we are like people in a dream. There is no substance in the
life which we are leading. It is such a dreary length of time since the
white bull carried off my sister Europa, that I have quite forgotten
how she looked, and the tones of her voice, and, indeed, almost doubt
whether such a little girl ever lived in the world. And whether she once
lived or no, I am convinced that she no longer survives, and that
therefore it is the merest folly to waste our own lives and happiness in
seeking her. Were we to find her, she would now be a woman grown, and
would look upon us all as strangers. So, to tell you the truth, I have
resolved to take up my abode here; and I entreat you, mother, brother,
and friend, to follow my example."

"Not I, for one," said Telephassa; although the poor queen, firmly as
she spoke, was so travel worn that she could hardly put her foot to the
ground--"not I, for one! In the depths of my heart, little Europa is
still the rosy child who ran to gather flowers so many years ago. She
has not grown to womanhood, nor forgotten me. At noon, at night,
journeying onward, sitting down to rest, her childish voice is always in
my ears, calling, 'Mother! mother!' Stop here who may, there is no
repose for me."

"Nor for me," said Cadmus, "while my dear mother pleases to go onward."

And the faithful Thasus, too, was resolved to bear them company. They
remained with Cilix a few days, however, and helped him to build a
rustic bower, resembling the one which they had formerly built for
Phœnix.

When they were bidding him farewell, Cilix burst into tears, and told
his mother that it seemed just as melancholy a dream to stay there, in
solitude, as to go onward. If she really believed that they would ever
find Europa, he was willing to continue the search with them, even now.
But Telephassa bade him remain there, and be happy, if his own heart
would let him. So the pilgrims took their leave of him, and departed,
and were hardly out of sight before some other wandering people came
along that way, and saw Cilix's habitation, and were greatly delighted
with the appearance of the place. There being abundance of unoccupied
ground in the neighbourhood, these strangers built huts for themselves,
and were soon joined by a multitude of new settlers, who quickly formed
a city. In the middle of it was seen a magnificent palace of coloured
marble, on the balcony of which, every noontide, appeared Cilix, in a
long purple robe, and with a jewelled crown upon his head; for the
inhabitants, when they found out that he was a king's son, had
considered him the fittest of all men to be a king himself.

One of the first acts of King Cilix's government was to send out an
expedition, consisting of a grave ambassador and an escort of bold and
hardy young men, with orders to visit the principal kingdoms of the
earth, and inquire whether a young maiden had passed through those
regions, galloping swiftly on a white bull. It is, therefore, plain to
my mind, that Cilix secretly blamed himself for giving up the search for
Europa, as long as he was able to put one foot before the other.

As for Telephassa, and Cadmus, and the good Thasus, it grieves me to
think of them, still keeping up that weary pilgrimage. The two young men
did their best for the poor queen, helping her over the rough places,
often carrying her across rivulets in their faithful arms, and seeking
to shelter her at nightfall, even when they themselves lay on the
ground. Sad, sad it was to hear them asking of every passerby if he had
seen Europa, so long after the white bull had carried her away. But,
though the gray years thrust themselves between, and made the child's
figure dim in their remembrance, neither of these true-hearted three
ever dreamed of giving up the search.

One morning, however, poor Thasus found that he had sprained his ankle,
and could not possibly go a step farther.

"After a few days, to be sure," said he, mournfully, "I might make shift
to hobble along with a stick. But that would only delay you, and perhaps
hinder you from finding dear little Europa, after all your pains and
trouble. Do you go forward, therefore, my beloved companions, and leave
me to follow as I may."

"Thou hast been a true friend, dear Thasus," said Queen Telephassa,
kissing his forehead. "Being neither my son, nor the brother of our lost
Europa, thou hast shown thyself truer to me and her than Phœnix and
Cilix did, whom we have left behind us. Without thy loving help, and
that of my son Cadmus, my limbs could not have borne me half so far as
this. Now, take thy rest, and be at peace. For--and it is the first time
I have owned it to myself--I begin to question whether we shall ever
find my beloved daughter in this world."

Saying this, the poor queen shed tears, because it was a grievous trial
to the mother's heart to confess that her hopes were growing faint. From
that day forward, Cadmus noticed that she never travelled with the same
alacrity of spirit that had heretofore supported her. Her weight was
heavier upon his arm.

Before setting out, Cadmus helped Thasus build a bower; while
Telephassa, being too infirm to give any great assistance, advised them
how to fit it up and furnish it, so that it might be as comfortable as a
hut of branches could. Thasus, however, did not spend all his days in
this green bower. For it happened to him, as to Phœnix and Cilix,
that other homeless people visited the spot and liked it, and built
themselves habitations in the neighbourhood. So here, in the course of
a few years, was another thriving city with a red freestone palace in
the centre of it, where Thasus set upon a throne, doing justice to the
people, with a purple robe over his shoulders, a sceptre in his hand,
and a crown upon his head. The inhabitants had made him king, not for
the sake of any royal blood (for none was in his veins), but because
Thasus was an upright, true-hearted, and courageous man, and therefore
fit to rule.

But, when the affairs of his kingdom were all settled, King Thasus laid
aside his purple robe, and crown, and sceptre, and bade his worthiest
subject distribute justice to the people in his stead. Then, grasping
the pilgrim's staff that had supported him so long, he set forth again,
hoping still to discover some hoof mark of the snow-white bull, some
trace of the vanished child. He returned, after a lengthened absence,
and sat down wearily upon his throne. To his latest hour, nevertheless,
King Thasus showed his true-hearted remembrance of Europa, by ordering
that a fire should always be kept burning in his palace, and a bath
steaming hot, and food ready to be served up, and a bed with snow-white
sheets, in case the maiden should arrive, and require immediate
refreshment. And though Europa never came, the good Thasus had the
blessings of many a poor traveller, who profited by the food and lodging
which were meant for the little playmate of the king's boyhood.

Telephassa and Cadmus were now pursuing their weary way, with no
companion but each other. The queen leaned heavily upon her son's arm,
and could walk only a few miles a day. But for all her weakness and
weariness, she would not be persuaded to give up the search. It was
enough to bring tears into the eyes of bearded men to hear the
melancholy tone with which she inquired of every stranger whether he
could tell her any news of the lost child.

"Have you seen a little girl--no, no, I mean a young maiden of full
growth--passing by this way, mounted on a snow-white bull, which gallops
as swiftly as the wind?"

"We have seen no such wondrous sight," the people would reply; and very
often, taking Cadmus aside, they whispered to him, "Is this stately and
sad-looking woman your mother? Surely she is not in her right mind; and
you ought to take her home, and make her comfortable, and do your best
to get this dream out of her fancy."

"It is no dream," said Cadmus. "Everything else is a dream, save that."

But, one day, Telephassa seemed feebler than usual, and leaned almost
her whole weight on the arm of Cadmus, and walked more slowly than ever
before. At last they reached a solitary spot, where she told her son
that she must needs lie down, and take a good, long rest.

"A good, long rest!" she repeated, looking Cadmus tenderly in the
face--"a good, long rest, thou dearest one!"

"As long as you please, dear mother," answered Cadmus.

Telephassa bade him sit down on the turf beside her, and then she took
his hand.

"My son," said she, fixing her dim eyes most lovingly upon him, "this
rest that I speak of will be very long indeed! You must not wait till it
is finished. Dear Cadmus, you do not comprehend me. You must make a
grave here, and lay your mother's weary frame into it. My pilgrimage is
over."

Cadmus burst into tears, and, for a long time, refused to believe that
his dear mother was now to be taken from him. But Telephassa reasoned
with him, and kissed him, and at length made him discern that it was
better for her spirit to pass away out of the toil, the weariness, the
grief, and disappointment which had burdened her on earth, ever since
the child was lost. He therefore repressed his sorrow, and listened to
her last words.

"Dearest Cadmus," said she, "thou hast been the truest son that ever
mother had, and faithful to the very last. Who else would have borne
with my infirmities as thou hast! It is owing to thy care, thou
tenderest child, that my grave was not dug long years ago, in some
valley, or on some hillside, that lies far, far behind us. It is enough.
Thou shalt wander no more on this hopeless search. But when thou hast
laid thy mother in the earth, then go, my son, to Delphi, and inquire of
the oracle what thou shalt do next."

"O mother, mother," cried Cadmus, "couldst thou but have seen my sister
before this hour!"

"It matters little now," answered Telephassa, and there was a smile upon
her face. "I go now to the better world, and, sooner or later, shall
find my daughter there."

I will not sadden you, my little hearers, with telling how Telephassa
died and was buried, but will only say, that her dying smile grew
brighter, instead of vanishing from her dead face; so that Cadmus felt
convinced that, at her very first step into the better world, she had
caught Europa in her arms. He planted some flowers on his mother's
grave, and left them to grow there, and make the place beautiful, when
he should be far away.

After performing this last sorrowful duty, he set forth alone, and took
the road toward the famous oracle of Delphi, as Telephassa had advised
him. On his way thither, he still inquired of most people whom he met
whether they had seen Europa; for, to say the truth, Cadmus had grown so
accustomed to ask the question, that it came to his lips as readily as a
remark about the weather. He received various answers. Some told him one
thing, and some another. Among the rest, a mariner affirmed, that, many
years before, in a distant country, he had heard a rumour about a white
bull, which came swimming across the sea with a child on his back,
dressed up in flowers that were blighted by the sea water. He did not
know what had become of the child or the bull; and Cadmus suspected,
indeed, by a queer twinkle in the mariner's eyes, that he was putting a
joke upon him, and had never really heard anything about the matter.

Poor Cadmus found it more wearisome to travel alone than to bear all his
dear mother's weight while she had kept him company. His heart, you will
understand, was now so heavy that it seemed impossible, sometimes, to
carry it any farther. But his limbs were strong and active and well
accustomed to exercise. He walked swiftly along, thinking of King Agenor
and Queen Telephassa, and his brothers, and the friendly Thasus, all of
whom he had left behind him, at one point of his pilgrimage or another,
and never expected to see them any more. Full of these remembrances, he
came within sight of a lofty mountain, which the people thereabouts told
him was called Parnassus. On the slope of Mount Parnassus was the famous
Delphi, whither Cadmus was going.

This Delphi was supposed to be the very midmost spot of the whole world.
The place of the oracle was a certain cavity in the mountain side, over
which, when Cadmus came thither, he found a rude bower of branches. It
reminded him of those which he had helped to build for Phoenix and
Cilix, and afterward for Thasus. In later times, when multitudes of
people came from great distances to put questions to the oracle, a
spacious temple of marble was erected over the spot. But in the days of
Cadmus, as I have told you, there was only this rustic bower, with its
abundance of green foliage, and a tuft of shrubbery, that ran wild over
the mysterious hole in the hillside.

When Cadmus had thrust a passage through the tangled boughs, and made
his way into the bower, he did not at first discern the half-hidden
cavity. But soon he felt a cold stream of air rushing out of it, with so
much force that it shook the ringlets on his cheek. Pulling away the
shrubbery which clustered over the hole, he bent forward, and spoke in a
distinct but reverential tone, as if addressing some unseen personage
inside of the mountain.

"Sacred oracle of Delphi," said he, "whither shall I go next in quest of
my dear sister Europa?"

There was at first a deep silence, and then a rushing sound, or a noise
like a long sigh, proceeding out of the interior of the earth. This
cavity, you must know, was looked upon as a sort of fountain of truth,
which sometimes gushed out in audible words; although, for the most
part, these words were such a riddle that they might just as well have
stayed at the bottom of the hole. But Cadmus was more fortunate than
many others who went to Delphi in search of truth. By and by, the
rushing noise began to sound like articulate language. It repeated, over
and over again, the following sentence, which, after all, was so like
the vague whistle of a blast of air, that Cadmus really did not quite
know whether it meant anything or not:

"Seek her no more! Seek her no more! Seek her no more!"

"What, then, shall I do?" asked Cadmus.

For, ever since he was a child, you know, it had been the great object
of his life to find his sister. From the very hour that he left
following the butterfly in the meadow, near his father's palace, he had
done his best to follow Europa, over land and sea. And now, if he must
give up the search, he seemed to have no more business in the world.

But again the sighing gust of air grew into something like a hoarse
voice.

"Follow the cow!" it said. "Follow the cow! Follow the cow!"

And when these words had been repeated until Cadmus was tired of hearing
them (especially as he could not imagine what cow it was, or why he was
to follow her), the gusty hole gave vent to another sentence.

"Where the stray cow lies down, there is your home."

These words were pronounced but a single time, and died away into a
whisper before Cadmus was fully satisfied that he had caught the
meaning. He put other questions, but received no answer; only the gust
of wind sighed continually out of the cavity, and blew the withered
leaves rustling along the ground before it.

"Did there really come any words out of the hole?" thought Cadmus; "or
have I been dreaming all this while?"

He turned away from the oracle, and thought himself no wiser than when
he came thither. Caring little what might happen to him, he took the
first path that offered itself, and went along at a sluggish pace; for,
having no object in view, nor any reason to go one way more than
another, it would certainly have been foolish to make haste. Whenever he
met anybody, the old question was at his tongue's end:

"Have you seen a beautiful maiden, dressed like a king's daughter, and
mounted on a snow-white bull, that gallops as swiftly as the wind?"

But, remembering what the oracle had said, he only half uttered the
words, and then mumbled the rest indistinctly; and from his confusion,
people must have imagined that this handsome young man had lost his
wits.

I know not how far Cadmus had gone, nor could he himself have told you,
when, at no great distance before him, he beheld a brindled cow. She was
lying down by the wayside, and quietly chewing her cud; nor did she take
any notice of the young man until he had approached pretty nigh. Then,
getting leisurely upon her feet, and giving her head a gentle toss, she
began to move along at a moderate pace, often pausing just long enough
to crop a mouthful of grass. Cadmus loitered behind, whistling idly to
himself, and scarcely noticing the cow; until the thought occurred to
him, whether this could possibly be the animal which, according to the
oracle's response, was to serve him for a guide. But he smiled at
himself for fancying such a thing. He could not seriously think that
this was the cow, because she went along so quietly, behaving just like
any other cow. Evidently she neither knew nor cared so much as a wisp of
hay about Cadmus, and was only thinking how to get her living along the
wayside, where the herbage was green and fresh. Perhaps she was going
home to be milked.

"Cow, cow, cow!" cried Cadmus. "Hey, Brindle, hey! Stop, my good cow."

He wanted to come up with the cow, so as to examine her, and see if she
would appear to know him, or whether there were any peculiarities to
distinguish her from a thousand other cows, whose only business is to
fill the milk pail, and sometimes kick it over. But still the brindled
cow trudged on, whisking her tail to keep the flies away, and taking as
little notice of Cadmus as she well could. If he walked slowly, so did
the cow, and seized the opportunity to graze. If he quickened his pace,
the cow went just so much the faster; and once, when Cadmus tried to
catch her by running, she threw out her heels, stuck her tail straight
on end, and set off at a gallop, looking as queerly as cows generally
do, while putting themselves to their speed.

When Cadmus saw that it was impossible to come up with her, he walked on
moderately, as before. The cow, too, went leisurely on, without looking
behind. Wherever the grass was greenest, there she nibbled a mouthful or
two. Where a brook glistened brightly across the path, there the cow
drank, and breathed a comfortable sigh, and drank again, and trudged
onward at the pace that best suited herself and Cadmus.

"I do believe," thought Cadmus, "that this may be the cow that was
foretold me. If it be the one, I suppose she will lie down somewhere
hereabouts."

Whether it were the oracular cow or some other one, it did not seem
reasonable that she should travel a great way farther. So, whenever they
reached a particularly pleasant spot on a breezy hillside, or in a
sheltered vale, or flowery meadow, on the shore of a calm lake, or along
the bank of a clear stream, Cadmus looked eagerly around to see if the
situation would suit him for a home. But still, whether he liked the
place or no, the brindled cow never offered to lie down. On she went at
the quiet pace of a cow going homeward to the barnyard; and, every
moment Cadmus expected to see a milkmaid approaching with a pail, or a
herdsman running to head the stray animal, and turn her back toward the
pasture. But no milkmaid came; no herdsman drove her back; and Cadmus
followed the stray brindle till he was almost ready to drop down with
fatigue.

"O brindled cow," cried he, in a tone of despair, "do you never mean to
stop?"

He had now grown too intent on following her to think of lagging behind,
however long the way, and whatever might be his fatigue. Indeed, it
seemed as if there were something about the animal that bewitched
people. Several persons who happened to see the brindled cow, and Cadmus
following behind, began to trudge after her, precisely as he did. Cadmus
was glad of somebody to converse with, and therefore talked very freely
to these good people. He told them all his adventures, and how he had
left King Agenor in his palace, and Phœnix at one place, and Cilix at
another, and Thasus at a third, and his dear mother, Queen Telephassa,
under a flowery sod; so that now he was quite alone, both friendless and
homeless. He mentioned, likewise, that the oracle had bidden him be
guided by a cow, and inquired of the strangers whether they supposed
that this brindled animal could be the one.

"Why, 'tis a very wonderful affair," answered one of his new companions.
"I am pretty well acquainted with the ways of cattle, and I never knew a
cow, of her own accord, to go so far without stopping. If my legs will
let me, I'll never leave following the beast till she lies down."

"Nor I!" said a second.

"Nor I!" cried a third. "If she goes a hundred miles farther, I'm
determined to see the end of it."

The secret of it was, you must know, that the cow was an enchanted cow,
and that, without their being conscious of it, she threw some of her
enchantment over everybody that took so much as half a dozen steps
behind her. They could not possibly help following her, though, all the
time, they fancied themselves doing it of their own accord. The cow was
by no means very nice in choosing her path; so that sometimes they had
to scramble over rocks, or wade through mud and mire, and were all in a
terribly bedraggled condition, and tired to death, and very hungry, into
the bargain. What a weary business it was!

But still they kept trudging stoutly forward, and talking as they went.
The strangers grew very fond of Cadmus, and resolved never to leave him,
but to help him build a city wherever the cow might lie down. In the
centre of it there should be a noble palace, in which Cadmus might
dwell, and be their king, with a throne, a crown and sceptre, a purple
robe, and everything else that a king ought to have; for in him there
was the royal blood, and the royal heart, and the head that knew how to
rule.

While they were talking of these schemes, and beguiling the tediousness
of the way with laying out the plan of the new city, one of the company
happened to look at the cow.

"Joy! joy!" cried he, clapping his hands. "Brindle is going to lie
down."

They all looked; and, sure enough, the cow had stopped and was staring
leisurely about her, as other cows do when on the point of lying down.
And slowly, slowly did she recline herself on the soft grass, first
bending her fore legs, and then crouching her hind ones. When Cadmus and
his companions came up with her, there was the brindled cow taking her
ease, chewing her cud, and looking them quietly in the face; as if this
was just the spot she had been seeking for, and as if it were all a
matter of course.

"This, then," said Cadmus, gazing around him, "this is to be my home."

It was a fertile and lovely plain, with great trees flinging their
sun-speckled shadows over it, and hills fencing it in from the rough
weather. At no great distance, they beheld a river gleaming in the
sunshine. A home feeling stole into the heart of poor Cadmus. He was
very glad to know that here he might awake in the morning, without the
necessity of putting on his dusty sandals to travel farther and farther.
The days and the years would pass over him, and find him still in this
pleasant spot. If he could have had his brothers with him, and his
friend Thasus, and could have seen his dear mother under a roof of his
own, he might here have been happy, after all their disappointments.
Some day or other, too, his sister Europa might have come quietly to the
door of his home, and smiled round upon the familiar faces. But, indeed,
since there was no hope of regaining the friends of his boyhood, or ever
seeing his dear sister again, Cadmus resolved to make himself happy with
these new companions, who had grown so fond of him while following the
cow.

"Yes, my friends," said he to them, "this is to be our home. Here we
will build our habitations. The brindled cow, which has led us hither,
will supply us with milk. We will cultivate the neighbouring soil, and
lead an innocent and happy life."

His companions joyfully assented to this plan; and, in the first place,
being very hungry and thirsty, they looked about them for the means of
providing a comfortable meal. Not far off, they saw a tuft of trees,
which appeared as if there might be a spring of water beneath them. They
went thither to fetch some, leaving Cadmus stretched on the ground
along with the brindled cow; for, now that he had found a place of rest,
it seemed as if all the weariness of his pilgrimage, ever since he left
King Agenor's palace, had fallen upon him at once. But his new friends
had not long been gone, when he was suddenly startled by cries, shouts,
and screams, and the noise of a terrible struggle, and in the midst of
it all, a most awful hissing, which went right through his ears like a
rough saw.

Running toward the tuft of trees, he beheld the head and fiery eyes of
an immense serpent or dragon, with the widest jaws that ever a dragon
had, and a vast many rows of horribly sharp teeth. Before Cadmus could
reach the spot, this pitiless reptile had killed his poor companions,
and was busily devouring them, making but a mouthful of each man.

It appears that the fountain of water was enchanted, and that the dragon
had been set to guard it, so that no mortal might ever quench his thirst
there. As the neighbouring inhabitants carefully avoided the spot, it
was now a long time (not less than a hundred years, or thereabouts)
since the monster had broken his fast; and, as was natural enough, his
appetite had grown to be enormous, and was not half satisfied by the
poor people whom he had just eaten up. When he caught sight of Cadmus,
therefore, he set up another abominable hiss, and flung back his immense
jaws, until his mouth looked like a great red cavern, at the farther end
of which were seen the legs of his last victim, whom he had hardly had
time to swallow.

But Cadmus was so enraged at the destruction of his friends, that he
cared neither for the size of the dragon's jaws nor for his hundreds of
sharp teeth. Drawing his sword, he rushed at the monster, and flung
himself right into his cavernous mouth. This bold method of attacking
him took the dragon by surprise; for, in fact, Cadmus had leaped so far
down into his throat, that the rows of terrible teeth could not close
upon him, nor do him the least harm in the world. Thus, though the
struggle was a tremendous one, and though the dragon shattered the tuft
of trees into small splinters by the lashing of his tail, yet, as Cadmus
was all the while slashing and stabbing at his very vitals, it was not
long before the scaly wretch bethought himself of slipping away. He had
not gone his length, however, when the brave Cadmus gave him a sword
thrust that finished the battle; and, creeping out of the gateway of the
creature's jaws, there he beheld him still wriggling his vast bulk,
although there was no longer life enough in him to harm a little child.

But do not you suppose that it made Cadmus sorrowful to think of the
melancholy fate which had befallen those poor, friendly people, who had
followed the cow along with him? It seemed as if he were doomed to lose
everybody whom he loved, or to see them perish in one way or another.
And here he was, after all his toils and troubles, in a solitary place,
with not a single human being to help him build a hut.

"What shall I do?" cried he aloud. "It were better for me to have been
devoured by the dragon, as my poor companions were."

"Cadmus," said a voice--but whether it came from above or below him, or
whether it spoke within his own breast, the young man could not
tell--"Cadmus, pluck out the dragon's teeth, and plant them in the
earth."

This was a strange thing to do; nor was it very easy, I should imagine,
to dig out all those deep-rooted fangs from the dead dragon's jaws. But
Cadmus toiled and tugged, and after pounding the monstrous head almost
to pieces with a great stone, he at last collected as many teeth as
might have filled a bushel or two. The next thing was to plant them.
This, likewise, was a tedious piece of work, especially as Cadmus was
already exhausted with killing the dragon and knocking his head to
pieces, and had nothing to dig the earth with, that I know of, unless it
were his sword blade. Finally, however, a sufficiently large tract of
ground was turned up, and sown with this new kind of seed; although half
of the dragon's teeth still remained to be planted some other day.

Cadmus, quite out of breath, stood leaning upon his sword, and wondering
what was to happen next. He had waited but a few moments, when he began
to see a sight, which was as great a marvel as the most marvellous thing
I ever told you about.

The sun was shining slantwise over the field, and showed all the moist,
dark soil just like any other newly planted piece of ground. All at
once, Cadmus fancied he saw something glisten very brightly, first at
one spot, then at another, and then at a hundred and a thousand spots
together. Soon he perceived them to be the steel heads of spears,
sprouting up everywhere like so many stalks of grain, and continually
growing taller and taller. Next appeared a vast number of bright sword
blades, thrusting themselves up in the same way. A moment afterward, the
whole surface of the ground was broken up by a multitude of polished
brass helmets, coming up like a crop of enormous beans. So rapidly did
they grow, that Cadmus now discerned the fierce countenance of a man
beneath every one. In short, before he had time to think what a
wonderful affair it was, he beheld an abundant harvest of what looked
like human beings, armed with helmets and breastplates, shields, swords
and spears; and before they were well out of the earth, they brandished
their weapons, and clashed them one against another, seeming to think,
little while as they had yet lived, that they had wasted too much of
life without a battle. Every tooth of the dragon had produced one of
these sons of deadly mischief.

Up sprouted, also, a great many trumpeters; and with the first breath
that they drew, they put their brazen trumpets to their lips, and
sounded a tremendous and ear-shattering blast; so that the whole space,
just now so quiet and solitary, reverberated with the clash and clang of
arms, the bray of warlike music, and the shouts of angry men. So enraged
did they all look, that Cadmus fully expected them to put the whole
world to the sword. How fortunate would it be for a great conqueror, if
he could get a bushel of the dragon's teeth to sow!

"Cadmus," said the same voice which he had before heard, "throw a stone
into the midst of the armed men."

So Cadmus seized a large stone, and, flinging it into the middle of the
earth army, saw it strike the breast-plate of a gigantic and
fierce-looking warrior. Immediately on feeling the blow, he seemed to
take it for granted that somebody had struck him; and, uplifting his
weapon, he smote his next neighbour a blow that cleft his helmet
asunder, and stretched him on the ground. In an instant, those nearest
the fallen warrior began to strike at one another with their swords and
stab with their spears. The confusion spread wider and wider. Each man
smote down his brother, and was himself smitten down before he had time
to exult in his victory. The trumpeters, all the while, blew their
blasts shriller and shriller; each soldier shouted a battle cry and
often fell with it on his lips. It was the strangest spectacle of
causeless wrath, and of mischief for no good end, that had ever been
witnessed; but, after all, it was neither more foolish nor more wicked
than a thousand battles that have since been fought, in which men have
slain their brothers with just as little reason as these children of the
dragon's teeth. It ought to be considered, too, that the dragon people
were made for nothing else; whereas other mortals were born to love and
help one another.

Well, this memorable battle continued to rage until the ground was
strewn with helmeted heads that had been cut off. Of all the thousands
that began the fight, there were only five left standing. These now
rushed from different parts of the field, and, meeting in the middle of
it, clashed their swords, and struck at each other's hearts as fiercely
as ever.

"Cadmus," said the voice again, "bid those five warriors to sheathe
their swords. They will help you to build the city."

Without hesitating an instant, Cadmus stepped forward, with the aspect
of a king and a leader, and extending his drawn sword amongst them,
spoke to the warriors in a stern and commanding voice.

"Sheathe your weapons!" said he.

And forthwith, feeling themselves bound to obey him, the five remaining
sons of the dragon's teeth made him a military salute with their swords,
returned them to the scabbards, and stood before Cadmus in a rank,
eyeing him as soldiers eye their captain, while awaiting the word of
command.

These five men had probably sprung from the biggest of the dragon's
teeth, and were the boldest and strongest of the whole army. They were
almost giants, indeed, and had good need to be so, else they never could
have lived through so terrible a fight. They still had a very furious
look, and, if Cadmus happened to glance aside, would glare at one
another, with fire flashing out of their eyes. It was strange, too, to
observe how the earth, out of which they had so lately grown, was
incrusted, here and there, on their bright breastplates, and even
begrimed their faces, just as you may have seen it clinging to beets and
carrots when pulled out of their native soil. Cadmus hardly knew whether
to consider them as men, or some odd kind of vegetable; although, on the
whole, he concluded that there was human nature in them, because they
were so fond of trumpets and weapons, and so ready to shed blood.

They looked him earnestly in the face, waiting for his next order, and
evidently desiring no other employment than to follow him from one
battlefield to another, all over the wide world. But Cadmus was wiser
than these earth-born creatures, with the dragon's fierceness in them,
and knew better how to use their strength and hardihood.

"Come!" said he. "You are sturdy fellows. Make yourselves useful! Quarry
some stones with those great swords of yours, and help me to build a
city."

The five soldiers grumbled a little, and muttered that it was their
business to overthrow cities, not to build them up. But Cadmus looked at
them with a stern eye, and spoke to them in, a tone of authority, so
that they knew him for their master, and never again thought of
disobeying his commands. They set to work in good earnest, and toiled so
diligently, that, in a very short time, a city began to make its
appearance. At first, to be sure, the workmen showed a quarrelsome
disposition. Like savage beasts, they would doubtless have done one
another a mischief, if Cadmus had not kept watch over them and quelled
the fierce old serpent that lurked in their hearts, when he saw it
gleaming out of their wild eyes. But, in course of time, they got
accustomed to honest labour, and had sense enough to feel that there was
more true enjoyment in living at peace, and doing good to one's
neighbour, than in striking at him with a two-edged sword. It may not be
too much to hope that the rest of mankind will by and by grow as wise
and peaceable as these five earth-begrimed warriors, who sprang from the
dragon's teeth.

And now the city was built, and there was a home in it for each of the
workmen. But the palace of Cadmus was not yet erected, because they had
left it till the last, meaning to introduce all the new improvements of
architecture, and make it very commodious, as well as stately and
beautiful. After finishing the rest of their labours, they all went to
bed betimes, in order to rise in the gray of the morning, and get at
least the foundation of the edifice laid before nightfall. But, when
Cadmus arose, and took his way toward the site where the palace was to
be built, followed by his five sturdy workmen marching all in a row,
what do you think he saw?

What should it be but the most magnificent palace that had ever been
seen in the world? It was built of marble and other beautiful kinds of
stone, and rose high into the air, with a splendid dome and a portico
along the front, and carved pillars, and everything else that befitted
the habitation of a mighty king. It had grown up out of the earth in
almost as short a time as it had taken the armed host to spring from the
dragon's teeth; and what made the matter more strange, no seed of this
stately edifice had ever been planted.

When the five workmen beheld the dome, with the morning sunshine making
it look golden and glorious, they gave a great shout.

"Long live King Cadmus," they cried, "in his beautiful palace."

And the new king, with his five faithful followers at his heels,
shouldering their pickaxes and marching in a rank (for they still had a
soldier-like sort of behaviour, as their nature was), ascended the
palace steps. Halting at the entrance, they gazed through a long vista
of lofty pillars that were ranged from end to end of a great hall. At
the farther extremity of this hall, approaching slowly toward him,
Cadmus beheld a female figure, wonderfully beautiful, and adorned with a
royal robe, and a crown of diamonds over her golden ringlets, and the
richest necklace that ever a queen wore. His heart thrilled with
delight. He fancied it his long-lost sister Europa, now grown to
womanhood, coming to make him happy, and to repay him, with her sweet
sisterly affection, for all those weary wanderings in quest of her since
he left King Agenor's palace--for the tears that he had shed, on parting
with Phœnix, and Cilix, and Thasus--for the heart-breakings that had
made the whole world seem dismal to him over his dear mother's grave.

But, as Cadmus advanced to meet the beautiful stranger, he saw that her
features were unknown to him, although, in the little time that it
required to tread along the hall, he had already felt a sympathy betwixt
himself and her.

"No, Cadmus," said the same voice that had spoken to him in the field of
the armed men, "this is not that dear sister Europa whom you have sought
so faithfully all over the wide world. This is Harmonia, a daughter of
the sky, who is given you instead of sister, and brothers, and friend,
and mother. You will find all those dear ones in her alone."

So King Cadmus dwelt in the palace, with his new friend Harmonia, and
found a great deal of comfort in his magnificent abode, but would
doubtless have found as much, if not more, in the humblest cottage by
the wayside. Before many years went by, there was a group of rosy little
children (but how they came thither has always been a mystery to me)
sporting in the great hall, and on the marble steps of the palace, and
running joyfully to meet King Cadmus when affairs of state left him at
leisure to play with them. They called him father, and Queen Harmonia
mother. The five old soldiers of the dragon's teeth grew very fond of
these small urchins, and were never weary of showing them how to
shoulder sticks, flourish wooden swords, and march in military order,
blowing a penny trumpet, or beating an abominable rub-a-dub upon a
little drum.

But King Cadmus, lest there should be too much of the dragon's tooth in
his children's disposition, used to find time from his kingly duties to
teach them their A B C--which he invented for their benefit, and for
which many little people, I am afraid, are not half so grateful to him
as they ought to be.




CHAPTER VII

THE MIRACULOUS PITCHER


One evening, in times long ago, old Philemon and his old wife Baucis sat
at their cottage door, enjoying the calm and beautiful sunset. They had
already eaten their frugal supper, and intended now to spend a quiet
hour or two before bedtime. So they talked together about their garden,
and their cow, and their bees, and their grapevine, which clambered over
the cottage wall, and on which the grapes were beginning to turn purple.
But the rude shouts of children, and the fierce barking of dogs, in the
village near at hand, grew louder and louder, until, at last, it was
hardly possible for Baucis and Philemon to hear each other speak.

"Ah, wife," cried Philemon, "I fear some poor traveller is seeking
hospitality among our neighbours yonder, and, instead of giving him food
and lodging, they have set their dogs at him, as their custom is!"

"Well-a-day!" answered old Baucis, "I do wish our neighbours felt a
little more kindness for their fellow creatures. And only think of
bringing up their children in this naughty way, and patting them on the
head when they fling stones at strangers!"

"Those children will never come to any good," said Philemon, shaking his
white head. "To tell you the truth, wife, I should not wonder if some
terrible thing were to happen to all the people in the village, unless
they mend their manners. But, as for you and me, so long as Providence
affords us a crust of bread, let us be ready to give half to any poor,
homeless stranger that may come along and need it."

"That's right, husband!" said Baucis. "So we will!"

These old folks, you must know, were quite poor, and had to work pretty
hard for a living. Old Philemon toiled diligently in his garden, while
Baucis was always busy with her distaff, or making a little butter and
cheese with their cow's milk, or doing one thing and another about the
cottage. Their food was seldom anything but bread, milk, and vegetables,
with sometimes a portion of honey from their beehive, and now and then a
bunch of grapes that had ripened against the cottage wall. But they were
two of the kindest old people in the world, and would cheerfully have
gone without their dinners, any day, rather than refuse a slice of their
brown loaf, a cup of new milk, and a spoonful of honey, to the weary
traveller who might pause before their door. They felt as if such guests
had a sort of holiness, and that they ought, therefore, to treat them
better and more bountifully than their own selves.

Their cottage stood on a rising ground, at some short distance from a
village, which lay in a hollow valley that was about half a mile in
breadth. This valley, in past ages, when the world was new, had probably
been the bed of a lake. There, fishes had glided to and fro in the
depths, and water weeds had grown along the margin, and trees and hills
had seen their reflected images in the broad and peaceful mirror. But,
as the waters subsided, men had cultivated the soil, and built houses on
it, so that it was now a fertile spot, and bore no traces of the ancient
lake, except a very small brook, which meandered through the midst of
the village, and supplied the inhabitants with water. The valley had
been dry land so long that oaks had sprung up, and grown great and high,
and perished with old age, and been succeeded by others, as tall and
stately as the first. Never was there a prettier or more fruitful
valley. The very sight of the plenty around them should have made the
inhabitants kind and gentle, and ready to show their gratitude to
Providence by doing good to their fellow creatures.

But, we are sorry to say, the people of this lovely village were not
worthy to dwell in a spot on which Heaven had smiled so beneficently.
They were a very selfish and hard-hearted people, and had no pity for
the poor, nor sympathy with the homeless. They would only have laughed,
had anybody told them that human beings owe a debt of love to one
another, because there is no other method of paying the debt of love and
care which all of us owe to Providence. You will hardly believe what I
am going to tell you. These naughty people taught their children to be
no better than themselves, and used to clap their hands, by way of
encouragement, when they saw the little boys and girls run after some
poor stranger, shouting at his heels, and pelting him with stones. They
kept large and fierce dogs, and whenever a traveller ventured to show
himself in the village street, this pack of disagreeable curs scampered
to meet him, barking, snarling, and showing their teeth. Then they would
seize him by his leg, or by his clothes, just as it happened; and if he
were ragged when he came, he was generally a pitiable object before he
had time to run away. This was a very terrible thing to poor travellers,
as you may suppose, especially when they chanced to be sick, or feeble,
or lame, or old. Such persons (if they once knew how badly these unkind
people, and their unkind children and curs, were in the habit of
behaving) would go miles and miles out of their way, rather than try to
pass through the village again.

What made the matter seem worse, if possible, was that when rich persons
came in their chariots, or riding on beautiful horses, with their
servants in rich liveries attending on them, nobody could be more civil
and obsequious than the inhabitants of the village. They would take off
their hats, and make the humblest bows you ever saw. If the children
were rude, they were pretty certain to get their ears boxed; and as for
the dogs, if a single cur in the pack presumed to yelp, his master
instantly beat him with a club, and tied him up without any supper. This
would have been all very well, only it proved that the villagers cared
much about the money that a stranger had in his pocket, and nothing
whatever for the human soul, which lives equally in the beggar and the
prince.

So now you can understand why old Philemon spoke so sorrowfully, when he
heard the shouts of the children and the barking of the dogs, at the
farther extremity of the village street. There was a confused din, which
lasted a good while, and seemed to pass quite through the breadth of the
valley.

"I never heard the dogs so loud!" observed the good old man.

"Nor the children so rude!" answered his good old wife.

They sat shaking their heads, one to another, while the noise came
nearer and nearer; until, at the foot of the little eminence on which
their cottage stood, they saw two travellers approaching on foot. Close
behind them came the fierce dogs, snarling at their very heels. A little
farther off, ran a crowd of children, who sent up shrill cries, and
flung stones at the two strangers, with all their might. Once or twice,
the younger of the two men (he was a slender and very active figure)
turned about and drove back the dogs with a staff which he carried in
his hand. His companion, who was a very tall person, walked calmly
along, as if disdaining to notice either the naughty children, or the
pack of curs, whose manners the children seemed to imitate.

Both of the travellers were very humbly clad, and looked as if they
might not have money enough in their pockets to pay for a night's
lodging. And this, I am afraid, was the reason why the villagers had
allowed their children and dogs to treat them so rudely.

"Come, wife," said Philemon to Baucis, "let us go and meet these poor
people. No doubt, they feel almost too heavy hearted to climb the hill."

"Go you and meet them," answered Baucis, "while I make haste within
doors, and see whether we can get them anything for supper. A
comfortable bowl of bread and milk would do wonders toward raising their
spirits."

Accordingly, she hastened into the cottage. Philemon, on his part, went
forward, and extended his hand with so hospitable an aspect that there
was no need of saying what nevertheless he did say, in the heartiest
tone imaginable:

"Welcome, strangers! welcome!"

"Thank you!" replied the younger of the two, in a lively kind of way,
notwithstanding his weariness and trouble. "This is quite another
greeting than we have met with yonder in the village. Pray, why do you
live in such a bad neighbourhood?"

"Ah!" observed old Philemon, with a quiet and benign smite, "Providence
put me here, I hope, among other reasons, in order that I may make you
what amends I can for the inhospitality of my neighbours."

"Well said, old father!" cried the traveller, laughing; "and, if the
truth must be told, my companion and myself need some amends. Those
children (the little rascals!) have bespattered us finely with their mud
balls; and one of the curs has torn my cloak, which was ragged enough
already. But I took him across the muzzle with my staff; and I think you
may have heard him yelp, even thus far off."

Philemon was glad to see him in such good spirits; nor, indeed, would
you have fancied, by the traveller's look and manner, that he was weary
with a long day's journey, besides being disheartened by rough treatment
at the end of it. He was dressed in rather an odd way, with a sort of
cap on his head, the brim of which stuck out over both ears. Though it
was a summer evening, he wore a cloak, which he kept wrapt closely about
him, perhaps because his undergarments were shabby. Philemon perceived,
too, that he had on a singular pair of shoes; but, as it was now growing
dusk, and as the old man's eyesight was none the sharpest, he could not
precisely tell in what the strangeness consisted. One thing, certainly,
seemed queer. The traveller was so wonderfully light and active that it
appeared as if his feet sometimes rose from the ground of their own
accord, or could only be kept down by an effort.

"I used to be light footed, in my youth," said Philemon to the
traveller. "But I always found my feet grow heavier toward nightfall."

"There is nothing like a good staff to help one along," answered the
stranger; "and I happen to have an excellent one, as you see."

This staff, in fact, was the oddest-looking staff that Philemon had ever
beheld. It was made of olive wood, and had something like a little pair
of wings near the top. Two snakes, carved in the wood, were represented
as twining themselves about the staff, and were so very skilfully
executed that old Philemon (whose eyes, you know, were getting rather
dim) almost thought them alive, and that he could see them wriggling and
twisting.

"A curious piece of work, sure enough!" said he. "A staff with wings! It
would be an excellent kind of stick for a little boy to ride astride
of!"

By this time, Philemon and his two guests had reached the cottage door.

"Friends," said the old man, "sit down and rest yourselves here on this
bench. My good wife Baucis has gone to see what you can have for supper.
We are poor folks; but you shall be welcome to whatever we have in the
cupboard."

The younger stranger threw himself carelessly on the bench, letting his
staff fall as he did so. And here happened something rather marvellous,
though trifling enough, too. The staff seemed to get up from the ground
of its own accord, and, spreading its little pair of wings, it half
hopped, half flew, and leaned itself against the wall of the cottage.
There it stood quite still, except that the snakes continued to wriggle.
But, in my private opinion, old Philemon's eyesight had been playing him
tricks again.

Before he could ask any questions, the elder stranger drew his attention
from the wonderful staff, by speaking to him.

"Was there not," asked the stranger, in a remarkably deep tone of voice,
"a lake, in very ancient times, covering the spot where now stands
yonder village?"

"Not in my day, friend," answered Philemon; "and yet I am an old man, as
you see. There were always the fields and meadows, just as they are now,
and the old trees, and the little stream murmuring through the midst of
the valley. My father, nor his father before him, ever saw it otherwise,
so far as I know; and doubtless it will still be the same, when old
Philemon shall be gone and forgotten!"

"That is more than can be safely foretold," observed the stranger; and
there was something very stern in his deep voice. He shook his head,
too, so that his dark and heavy curls were shaken with the movement.
"Since the inhabitants of yonder village have forgotten the affections
and sympathies of their nature, it were better that the lake should be
rippling over their dwellings again!"

The traveller looked so stern that Philemon was really almost
frightened; the more so, that, at his frown, the twilight seemed
suddenly to grow darker, and that, when he shook his head, there was a
roll as of thunder in the air.

But, in a moment afterward, the stranger's face became so kindly and
mild, that the old man quite forgot his terror. Nevertheless, he could
not help feeling that this elder traveller must be no ordinary
personage, although he happened now to be attired so humbly and to be
journeying on foot. Not that Philemon fancied him a prince in disguise,
or any character of that sort; but rather some exceedingly wise man, who
went about the world in this poor garb, despising wealth and all worldly
objects, and seeking everywhere to add a mite to his wisdom. This idea
appeared the more probable, because, when Philemon raised his eyes to
the stranger's face, he seemed to see more thought there, in one look,
than he could have studied out in a lifetime.

While Baucis was getting the supper, the travellers both began to talk
very sociably with Philemon. The younger, indeed, was extremely
loquacious, and made such shrewd and witty remarks, that the good old
man continually burst out a-laughing, and pronounced him the merriest
fellow whom he had seen for many a day.

"Pray, my young friend," said he, as they grew familiar together, "what
may I call your name?"

"Why, I am very nimble, as you see," answered the traveller. "So, if you
call me Quicksilver, the name will fit tolerably well."

"Quicksilver? Quicksilver?" repeated Philemon, looking in the
traveller's face, to see if he were making fun of him. "It is a very odd
name! And your companion there? Has he as strange a one?"

"You must ask the thunder to tell it you!" replied Quicksilver, putting
on a mysterious look. "No other voice is loud enough."

This remark, whether it were serious or in jest, might have caused
Philemon to conceive a very great awe of the elder stranger, if, on
venturing to gaze at him, he had not beheld so much beneficence in his
visage. But, undoubtedly, here was the grandest figure that ever sat so
humbly beside a cottage door. When the stranger conversed, it was with
gravity, and in such a way that Philemon felt irresistibly moved to
tell him everything which he had most at heart. This is always the
feeling that people have, when they meet with anyone wise enough to
comprehend all their good and evil, and to despise not a tittle of it.

But Philemon, simple and kind-hearted old man that he was, had not many
secrets to disclose. He talked, however, quite garrulously, about the
events of his past life, in the whole course of which he had never been
a score of miles from this very spot. His wife Baucis and himself had
dwelt in the cottage from their youth upward, earning their bread by
honest labour, always poor, but still contented. He told what excellent
butter and cheese Baucis made, and how nice were the vegetables which he
raised in his garden. He said, too, that, because they loved one another
so very much, it was the wish of both that death might not separate
them, but that they should die, as they had lived, together.

As the stranger listened, a smile beamed over his countenance, and made
its expression as sweet as it was grand.

"You are a good old man," said he to Philemon, "and you have a good old
wife to be your helpmeet. It is fit that your wish be granted."

And it seemed to Philemon, just then, as if the sunset clouds threw up a
bright flash from the west, and kindled a sudden light in the sky.

Baucis had now got supper ready, and, coming to the door, began to make
apologies for the poor fare which she was forced to set before her
guests.

"Had we known you were coming," said she, "my good man and myself would
have gone without a morsel, rather than you should lack a better supper.
But I took the most part of to-day's milk to make cheese; and our last
loaf is already half eaten. Ah me! I never feel the sorrow of being
poor, save when a poor traveller knocks at our door."

"All will be very well; do not trouble yourself, my good dame," replied
the elder stranger, kindly. "An honest, hearty welcome to a guest works
miracles with the fare, and is capable of turning the coarsest food to
nectar and ambrosia."

"A welcome you shall have," cried Baucis, "and likewise a little honey
that we happen to have left, and a bunch of purple grapes besides."

"Why, Mother Baucis, it is a feast!" exclaimed Quicksilver, laughing,
"an absolute feast! and you shall see how bravely I will play my part at
it! I think I never felt hungrier in my life."

"Mercy on us!" whispered Baucis to her husband. "If the young man has
such a terrible appetite, I am afraid there will not be half enough
supper!"

They all went into the cottage.

And, now, my little auditors, shall I tell you something that will make
you open your eyes very wide? It is really one of the oddest
circumstances in the who|e story. Quicksilver's staff, you recollect,
had set itself up against the wall of the cottage. Well; when its master
entered the door, leaving this wonderful staff behind, what should it do
but immediately spread its little wings, and go hopping and fluttering
up the door-steps! Tap, tap, went the staff, on the kitchen floor; nor
did it rest until it had stood itself on end, with the greatest gravity
and decorum, beside Quicksilver's chair. Old Philemon, however, as well
as his wife, was so taken up in attending to their guests, that no
notice was given to what the staff had been about.

As Baucis had said, there was but a scanty supper for two hungry
travellers. In the middle of the table was the remnant of a brown loaf,
with a piece of cheese on one side of it, and a dish of honeycomb on the
other. There was a pretty good bunch of grapes for each of the guests. A
moderately sized earthen pitcher, nearly full of milk, stood at a corner
of the board; and when Baucis had filled two bowls, and set them before
the strangers, only a little milk remained in the bottom of the pitcher.
Alas! it is a very sad business, when a bountiful heart finds itself
pinched and squeezed among narrow circumstances. Poor Baucis kept
wishing that she might starve for a week to come, if it were possible,
by so doing, to provide these hungry folks a more plentiful supper.

And, since the supper was so exceedingly small, she could not help
wishing that their appetites had not been quite so large. Why, at their
very first sitting down, the travellers both drank off all the milk in
their two bowls, at a draught.

"A little more milk, kind Mother Baucis, if you please," said
Quicksilver. "The day has been hot, and I am very much athirst."

"Now, my dear people," answered Baucis, in great confusion, "I am so
sorry and ashamed! But the truth is, there is hardly a drop more milk in
the pitcher. O husband! husband! why didn't we go without our supper?"

"Why, it appears to me," cried Quicksilver, starting up from the table
and taking the pitcher by the handle, "it really appears to me that
matters are not quite so bad as you represent them. Here is certainly
more milk in the pitcher."

So saying, and to the vast astonishment of Baucis, he proceeded to fill,
not only his own bowl, but his companion's likewise, from the pitcher,
that was supposed to be almost empty. The good woman could scarcely
believe her eyes. She had certainly poured out nearly all the milk, and
had peeped in afterward, and seen the bottom of the pitcher, as she set
it down upon the table.

"But I am old," thought Baucis to herself, "and apt to be forgetful I
suppose I must have made a mistake. At all events, the pitcher cannot
help being empty now, after filling the bowls twice over."

"What excellent milk!" observed Quicksilver, after quaffing the contents
of the second bowl, "Excuse me, my kind hostess, but I must really ask
you for a little more."

Now Baucis had seen, as plainly as she could see anything, that
Quicksilver had turned the pitcher upside down, and consequently had
poured out every drop of milk, in filling the last bowl. Of course,
there could not possibly be any left. However, in order to let him know
precisely how the case was, she lifted the pitcher, and made a gesture
as if pouring milk into Quicksilver's bowl, but without the remotest
idea that any milk would stream forth. What was her surprise, therefore,
when such an abundant cascade fell bubbling into the bowl, that it was
immediately filled to the brim, and overflowed upon the table! The two
snakes that were twisted about Quicksilver's staff (but neither Baucis
nor Philemon happened to observe this circumstance) stretched out their
heads, and began to lap up the spilt milk.

And then what a delicious fragrance the milk had! It seemed as if
Philemon's only cow must have pastured, that day, on the richest herbage
that could be found anywhere in the world. I only wish that each of
you, my beloved little souls, could have a bowl of such nice milk, at
supper time!

"And now a slice of your brown loaf, Mother Baucis," said Quicksilver,
"and a little of that honey!"

Baucis cut him a slice, accordingly; and though the loaf, when she and
her husband ate of it, had been rather too dry and crusty to be
palatable, it was now as light and moist as if but a few hours out of
the oven. Tasting a crumb, which had fallen on the table, she found it
more delicious than bread ever was before, and could hardly believe that
it was a loaf of her own kneading and baking. Yet, what other loaf could
it possibly be?

But, oh the honey! I may just as well let it alone, without trying to
describe how exquisitely it smelt and looked. Its colour was that of the
purest and most transparent gold; and it had the odour of a thousand
flowers; but of such flowers as never grew in an earthly garden, and to
seek which the bees must have flown high above the clouds. The wonder
is, that, after alighting on a flower bed of so delicious fragrance and
immortal bloom, they should have been content to fly down again to their
hive in Philemon's garden. Never was such honey tasted, seen, or smelt.
The perfume floated around the kitchen, and made it so delightful, that,
had you closed your eyes, you would instantly have forgotten the low
ceiling and smoky walls, and have fancied yourself in an arbour, with
celestial honeysuckles creeping over it.

Although good Mother Baucis was a simple old dame, she could not but
think that there was something rather out of the common way, in all that
had been going on. So, after helping the guests to bread and honey, and
laying a bunch of grapes by each of their plates, she sat down by
Philemon, and told him what she had seen, in a whisper.

"Did you ever hear the like?" asked she.

"No, I never did," answered Philemon, with a smile. "And I rather think,
my dear old wife, you have been walking about in a sort of a dream. If I
had poured out the milk, I should have seen through the business at
once. There happened to be a little more in the pitcher than you
thought--that is all."

"Ah, husband," said Baucis, "say what you will, these are very uncommon
people."

"Well, well," replied Philemon, still smiling, "perhaps they are. They
certainly do look as if they had seen better days; and I am heartily
glad to see them making so comfortable a supper."

Each of the guests had now taken his bunch of grapes upon his plate.
Baucis (who rubbed her eyes, in order to see the more clearly) was of
opinion that the clusters had grown larger and richer, and that each
separate grape seemed to be on the point of bursting with ripe juice. It
was entirely a mystery to her how such grapes could ever have been
produced from the old stunted vine that climbed against the cottage
wall.

"Very admirable grapes these!" observed Quicksilver, as he swallowed one
after another, without apparently diminishing his cluster. "Pray, my
good host, whence did you gather them?"

"From my own vine," answered Philemon. "You may see one of its branches
twisting across the window, yonder. But wife and I never thought the
grapes very fine ones."

"I never tasted better," said the guest. "Another cup of this delicious
milk, if you please, and I shall then have supped better than a prince."

This time, old Philemon bestirred himself, and took up the pitcher; for
he was curious to discover whether there was any reality in the marvels
which Baucis had whispered to him. He knew that his good old wife was
incapable of falsehood, and that she was seldom mistaken in what she
supposed to be true; but this was so very singular a case, that he
wanted to see into it with his own eyes. On taking up the pitcher,
therefore, he slyly peeped into it, and was fully satisfied that it
contained not so much as a single drop. All at once, however, he beheld
a little white fountain, which gushed up from the bottom of the pitcher,
and speedily filled it to the brim with foaming and deliciously fragrant
milk. It was lucky that Philemon, in his surprise, did not drop the
miraculous pitcher from his hand.

"Who are ye, wonder-working strangers!" cried he, even more bewildered
than his wife had been.

"Your guests, my good Philemon, and your friends," replied the elder
traveller, in his mild, deep voice, that had something at once sweet and
awe-inspiring in it. "Give me likewise a cup of the milk; and may your
pitcher never be empty for kind Baucis and yourself, any more than for
the needy wayfarer!"

The supper being now over, the strangers requested to be shown to their
place of repose. The old people would gladly have talked with them a
little longer, and have expressed the wonder which they felt, and their
delight at finding the poor and meagre supper prove so much better and
more abundant than they hoped. But the elder traveller had inspired them
with such reverence, that they dared not ask him any questions. And
when Philemon drew Quicksilver aside, and inquired how under the sun a
fountain of milk could have got into an old earthen pitcher, this latter
personage pointed to his staff.

"There is the whole mystery of the affair," quoth Quicksilver; "and if
you can make it out, I'll thank you to let me know. I can't tell what to
make of my staff. It is always playing such odd tricks as this;
sometimes getting me a supper, and, quite as often, stealing it away. If
I had any faith in such nonsense, I should say the stick was bewitched!"

He said no more, but looked so slyly in their faces, that they rather
fancied he was laughing at them. The magic staff went hopping at his
heels, as Quicksilver quitted the room. When left alone, the good old
couple spent some little time in conversation about the events of the
evening, and then lay down on the floor, and fell fast asleep. They had
given up their sleeping room to the guests, and had no other bed for
themselves, save these planks, which I wish had been as soft as their
own hearts.

The old man and his wife were stirring, betimes, in the morning, and the
strangers likewise arose with the sun, and made their preparations to
depart. Philemon hospitably entreated them to remain a little longer,
until Baucis could milk the cow, and bake a cake upon the hearth, and,
perhaps, find them a few fresh eggs for breakfast. The guests, however,
seemed to think it better to accomplish a good part of their journey
before the heat of the day should come on. They, therefore, persisted in
setting out immediately, but asked Philemon and Baucis to walk forth
with them a short distance, and show them the road which they were to
take.

So they all four issued from the cottage, chatting together like old
friends. It was very remarkable, indeed, how familiar the old couple
insensibly grew with the elder traveller, and how their good and simple
spirits melted into his, even as two drops of water would melt into the
illimitable ocean. And as for Quicksilver, with his keen, quick,
laughing wits, he appeared to discover every little thought that but
peeped into their minds, before they suspected it themselves. They
sometimes wished, it is true, that he had not been quite so
quick-witted, and also that he would fling away his staff, which looked
so mysteriously mischievous, with the snakes always writhing about it.
But then, again, Quicksilver showed himself so very good humoured that
they would have been rejoiced to keep him in their cottage, staff,
snakes, and all, every day, and the whole day long.

"Ah me! Well-a-day!" exclaimed Philemon, when they had walked a little
way from their door. "If our neighbours only knew what a blessed thing
it is to show hospitality to strangers, they would tie up all their
dogs, and never allow their children to fling another stone."

"It is a sin and shame for them to behave so--that it is!" cried good
old Baucis, vehemently. "And I mean to go this very day, and tell some
of them what naughty people they are!"

"I fear," remarked Quicksilver, slyly smiling, "that you will find none
of them at home."

The elder traveller's brow, just then, assumed such a grave, stern, and
awful grandeur, yet serene withal, that neither Baucis nor Philemon
dared to speak a word. They gazed reverently into his face, as if they
had been gazing at the sky.

"When men do not feel toward the humblest stranger as if he were a
brother," said the traveller, in tones so deep that they sounded like
those of an organ, "they are unworthy to exist on earth, which was
created as the abode of a great human brotherhood!"

"And, by the by, my dear old people," cried Quicksilver, with the
liveliest look of fun and mischief in his eyes, "where is this same
village that you talk about? On which side of us does it lie? Methinks I
do not see it hereabouts."

Philemon and his wife turned toward the valley, where, at sunset, only
the day before, they had seen the meadows, the houses, the gardens, the
clumps of trees, the wide, green-margined street, with children playing
in it, and all the tokens of business, enjoyment, and prosperity. But
what was their astonishment! There was no longer any appearance of a
village! Even the fertile vale, in the hollow of which it lay, had
ceased to have existence. In its stead, they beheld the broad, blue
surface of a lake, which filled the great basin of the valley from brim
to brim, and reflected the surrounding hills in its bosom with as
tranquil an image as if it had been there ever since the creation of the
world. For an instant, the lake remained perfectly smooth. Then a little
breeze sprang up, and caused the water to dance, glitter, and sparkle in
the early sunbeams, and to dash, with a pleasant rippling murmur,
against the hither shore.

The lake seemed so strangely familiar that the old couple were greatly
perplexed, and felt as if they could only have been dreaming about a
village having lain there. But, the next moment, they remembered the
vanished dwellings, and the faces and characters of the inhabitants, far
too distinctly for a dream. The village had been there yesterday, and
now was gone!

"Alas!" cried the kind-hearted old people, "what has become of our poor
neighbours?"

"They exist no longer as men and women," said the elder traveller, in
his grand and deep voice, while a roll of thunder seemed to echo it at a
distance. "There was neither use nor beauty in such a life as theirs;
for they never softened or sweetened the hard lot of mortality by the
exercise of kindly affections between man and man. They retained no
image of the better life in their bosoms; therefore, the lake, that was
of old, has spread itself forth again, to reflect the sky!"

"And as for those foolish people," said Quicksilver, with his
mischievous smile, "they are all transformed to fishes. There needed but
little change, for they were already a scaly set of rascals, and the
coldest-blooded beings in existence. So, kind Mother Baucis, whenever
you or your husband have an appetite for a dish of broiled trout, he can
throw in a line, and pull out half a dozen of your old neighbours!"

"Ah," cried Baucis, shuddering, "I would not, for the world, put one of
them on the gridiron!"

"No," added Philemon, making a wry face, "we could never relish them!"

"As for you, good Philemon," continued the elder traveller--"and you,
kind Baucis--you, with your scanty means, have mingled so much heartfelt
hospitality with your entertainment of the homeless stranger, that the
milk became an inexhaustible fount of nectar, and the brown loaf and
the honey were ambrosia. Thus, the divinities have feasted, at your
board, off the same viands that supply their banquets on Olympus. You
have done well, my dear old friends. Wherefore, request whatever favour
you have most at heart, and it is granted."

Philemon and Baucis looked at one another, and then--I know not which of
the two it was who spoke, but that one uttered the desire of both their
hearts.

"Let us live together, while we live, and leave the world at the same
instant, when we die! For we have always loved one another!"

"Be it so!" replied the stranger, with majestic kindness, "Now, look
toward your cottage!"

They did so. But what was their surprise on beholding a tall edifice of
white marble, with a wide-open portal, occupying the spot where their
humble residence had so lately stood!

"There is your home," said the stranger, beneficently smiling on them
both. "Exercise your hospitality in yonder palace as freely as in the
poor hovel to which you welcomed us last evening."

The old folks fell on their knees to thank him; but, behold! neither he
nor Quicksilver was there.

So Philemon and Baucis took up their residence in the marble palace, and
spent their time, with vast satisfaction to themselves, in making
everybody jolly and comfortable who happened to pass that way. The milk
pitcher, I must not forget to say, retained its marvellous quality of
being never empty, when it was desirable to have it full. Whenever an
honest, good-humoured, and free-hearted guest took a draught from this
pitcher, he invariably found it the sweetest and most invigorating fluid
that ever ran down his throat. But, if a cross and disagreeable
curmudgeon happened to sip, he was pretty certain to twist his visage
into a hard knot, and pronounce it a pitcher of sour milk!

Thus the old couple lived in their palace a great, great while, and grew
older and older, and very old indeed. At length, however, there came a
summer morning when Philemon and Baucis failed to make their appearance,
as on other mornings, with one hospitable smile overspreading both their
pleasant faces, to invite the guests of over night to breakfast. The
guests searched everywhere, from top to bottom of the spacious palace,
and all to no purpose. But, after a great deal of perplexity, they
espied, in front of the portal, two venerable trees, which nobody could
remember to have seen there the day before. Yet there they stood, with
their roots fastened deep into the soil, and a huge breadth of foliage
overshadowing the whole front of the edifice. One was an oak, and the
other a linden tree. Their boughs--it was strange and beautiful to
see--were intertwined together, and embraced one another, so that each
tree seemed to live in the other tree's bosom much more than in its own.

While the guests were marvelling how these trees, that must have
required at least a century to grow, could have come to be so tall and
venerable in a single night, a breeze sprang up, and set their
intermingled boughs astir. And then there was a deep, broad murmur in
the air, as if the two mysterious trees were speaking.

"I am old Philemon!" murmured the oak.

"I am old Baucis!" murmured the linden tree.

But, as the breeze grew stronger, the trees both spoke at
once--"Philemon! Baucis! Baucis! Philemon!"--as if one were both and
both were one, and talked together in the depths of their mutual heart.
It was plain enough to perceive that the good old couple had renewed
their age, and were now to spend a quiet and delightful hundred years or
so, Philemon as an oak, and Baucis as a linden tree. And oh, what a
hospitable shade did they fling around them. Whenever a wayfarer paused
beneath it, he heard a pleasant whisper of the leaves above his head,
and wondered how the sound should so much resemble words like these:

"Welcome, welcome, dear traveller, welcome!"

And some kind soul, that knew what would have pleased old Baucis and old
Philemon best, built a circular seat around both their trunks, where,
for a great while afterward the weary, and the hungry, and the thirsty
used to repose themselves, and quaff milk abundantly out of the
miraculous pitcher.

And I wish, for all our sakes, that we had the pitcher here now!




CHAPTER VIII

THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN


Long, long ago, when this old world was in its tender infancy, there was
a child, named Epimetheus, who never had either father or mother; and,
that he might not be lonely, another child, fatherless and motherless
like himself, was sent from a far country, to live with him, and be his
playfellow and helpmate. Her name was Pandora.

The first thing that Pandora saw, when she entered the cottage where
Epimetheus dwelt, was a great box. And almost the first question which
she put to him, after crossing the threshold, was this:

"Epimetheus, what have you in that box?"

"My dear little Pandora," answered Epimetheus, "that is a secret, and
you must be kind enough not to ask any questions about it. The box was
left here to be kept safely, and I do not myself know what it contains."

"But who gave it to you?" asked Pandora. "And where did it come from?"

"That is a secret, too," replied Epimetheus.

"How provoking!" exclaimed Pandora, pouting her lip. "I wish the great
ugly box were out of the way!"

"Oh, come, don't think of it any more," cried Epimetheus. "Let us run
out of doors, and have some nice play with the other children."

It is thousands of years since Epimetheus and Pandora were alive; and
the world, nowadays, is a very different sort of thing from what it was
in their time. Then, everybody was a child. There needed no fathers and
mothers to take care of the children; because there was no danger, nor
trouble of any kind, and no clothes to be mended, and there was always
plenty to eat and drink. Whenever a child wanted his dinner, he found it
growing on a tree; and, if he looked at the tree in the morning, he
could see the expanding blossom of that night's supper; or, at eventide,
he saw the tender bud of to-morrow's breakfast. It was a very pleasant
life indeed. No labour to be done, no tasks to be studied; nothing but
sports and dances, and sweet voices of children talking, or carolling
like birds, or gushing out in merry laughter, throughout the livelong
day.

What was most wonderful of all, the children never quarrelled among
themselves; neither had they any crying fits; nor, since time first
began, had a single one of these little mortals ever gone apart into a
corner, and sulked. Oh, what a good time was that to be alive in! The
truth is, those ugly little winged monsters, called Troubles, which are
now almost as numerous as mosquitoes, had never yet been seen on the
earth. It is probable that the very greatest disquietude which a child
had ever experienced was Pandora's vexation at not being able to
discover the secret of the mysterious box.

This was at first only the faint shadow of a Trouble; but, every day, it
grew more and more substantial, until, before a great while, the cottage
of Epimetheus and Pandora was less sunshiny than those of the other
children.

"Whence can the box have come?" Pandora continually kept saying to
herself and to Epimetheus. "And what in the world can be inside of it?"

"Always talking about this box!" said Epimetheus, at last; for he had
grown extremely tired of the subject. "I wish, dear Pandora, you would
try to talk of something else. Come, let us go and gather some ripe
figs, and eat them under the trees, for our supper. And I know a vine
that has the sweetest and juiciest grapes you ever tasted."

"Always talking about grapes and figs!" cried Pandora, pettishly.

"Well, then," said Epimetheus, who was a very good-tempered child, like
a multitude of children in those days, "let us run out and have a merry
time with our playmates."

"I am tired of merry times, and don't care if I never have any more!"
answered our pettish little Pandora. "And, besides, I never do have any.
This ugly box! I am so taken up with thinking about it all the time. I
insist upon your telling me what is inside of it."

"As I have already said, fifty times over, I do not know!" replied
Epimetheus, getting a little vexed. "How, then, can I tell you what is
inside?"

"You might open it," said Pandora, looking sideways at Epimetheus, "and
then we could see for ourselves."

"Pandora, what are you thinking of?" exclaimed Epimetheus.

And his face expressed so much horror at the idea of looking into a box,
which had been confided to him on the condition of his never opening it,
that Pandora thought it best not to suggest it any more. Still, however,
she could not help thinking and talking about the box.

"At least," said she, "you can tell me how it came here."

"It was left at the door," replied Epimetheus, "just before you came, by
a person who looked very smiling and intelligent, and who could hardly
forbear laughing as he put it down. He was dressed in an odd kind of a
cloak, and had on a cap that seemed to be made partly of feathers, so
that it looked almost as if it had wings."

"What sort of a staff had he?" asked Pandora.

"Oh, the most curious staff you ever saw!" cried Epimetheus. "It was
like two serpents twisting around a stick, and was carved so naturally
that I, at first, thought the serpents were alive."

"I know him," said Pandora, thoughtfully. "Nobody else has such a staff.
It was Quicksilver; and he brought me hither, as well as the box. No
doubt he intended it for me; and, most probably, it contains pretty
dresses for me to wear, or toys for you and me to play with, or
something very nice for us both to eat!"

"Perhaps so," answered Epimetheus, turning away. "But until Quicksilver
comes back and tells us so, we have neither of us any right to lift the
lid of the box."

"What a dull boy he is!" muttered Pandora, as Epimetheus left the
cottage. "I do wish he had a little more enterprise!"

For the first time since her arrival, Epimetheus had gone out without
asking Pandora to accompany him. He went to gather figs and grapes by
himself, or to seek whatever amusement he could find, in other society
than his little playfellow's. He was tired to death of hearing about the
box, and heartily wished that Quicksilver, or whatever was the
messenger's name, had left it at some other child's door, where Pandora
would never have set eyes on it. So perseveringly as did she babble
about this one thing! The box, the box, and nothing but the box! It
seemed as if the box were bewitched, and as if the cottage were not big
enough to hold it, without Pandora's continually stumbling over it, and
making Epimetheus stumble over it likewise, and bruising all four of
their shins.

Well, it was really hard that poor Epimetheus should have a box in his
ears from morning till night; especially as the little people of the
earth were so unaccustomed to vexations, in those happy days, that they
knew not how to deal with them. Thus, a small vexation made as much
disturbance then as a far bigger one would in our own times.

After Epimetheus was gone, Pandora stood gazing at the box. She had
called it ugly, above a hundred times; but, in spite of all that she had
said against it, it was positively a very handsome article of furniture,
and would have been quite an ornament to any room in which it should be
placed. It was made of a beautiful kind of wood, with dark and rich
veins spreading over its surface, which was so highly polished that
little Pandora could see her face in it. As the child had no other
looking glass, it is odd that she did not value the box, merely on this
account.

The edges and corners of the box were carved with most wonderful skill.
Around the margin there were figures of graceful men and women, and the
prettiest children ever seen, reclining or sporting amid a profusion of
flowers and foliage; and these various objects were so exquisitely
represented, and were wrought together in such harmony, that flowers,
foliage, and human beings seemed to combine into a wreath of mingled
beauty. But here and there, peeping forth from behind the carved
foliage, Pandora once or twice fancied that she saw a face not so
lovely, or something or other that was disagreeable, and which stole the
beauty out of all the rest. Nevertheless, on looking more closely, and
touching the spot with her finger, she could discover nothing of the
kind. Some face that was really beautiful had been made to look ugly by
her catching a sideway glimpse at it.

The most beautiful face of all was done in what is called high relief,
in the centre of the lid. There was nothing else, save the dark, smooth
richness of the polished wood, and this one face in the centre, with a
garland of flowers about its brow. Pandora had looked at this face a
great many times, and imagined that the mouth could smile if it liked,
or be grave when it chose, the same as any living mouth. The features,
indeed, all wore a very lively and rather mischievous expression, which
looked almost as if it needs must burst out of the carved lips, and
utter itself in words.

Had the mouth spoken, it would probably have been something like this:

"Do not be afraid, Pandora! What harm can there be in opening the box?
Never mind that poor, simple Epimetheus! You are wiser than he, and have
ten times as much spirit. Open the box, and see if you do not find
something very pretty!"

The box, I had almost forgotten to say, was fastened; not by a lock, nor
by any other such contrivance, but by a very intricate knot of gold
cord. There appeared to be no end to this knot, and no beginning. Never
was a knot so cunningly twisted, nor with so many ins and outs, which
roguishly defied the skilfullest fingers to disentangle them. And yet,
by the very difficulty that there was in it, Pandora was the more
tempted to examine the knot, and just see how it was made. Two or three
times, already, she had stooped over the box, and taken the knot between
her thumb and forefinger, but without positively trying to undo it.

"I really believe," said she to herself, "that I begin to see how it was
done. Nay, perhaps I could tie it up again, after undoing it. There
would be no harm in that, surely. Even Epimetheus would not blame me for
that. I need not open the box, and should not, of course, without the
foolish boy's consent, even if the knot were untied."

It might have been better for Pandora if she had had a little work to
do, or anything to employ her mind upon, so as not to be so constantly
thinking of this one subject. But children led so easy a life, before
any Troubles came into the world, that they had really a great deal too
much leisure. They could not be forever playing at hide-and-seek among
the flower shrubs, or at blind-man's-buff with garlands over their eyes,
or at whatever other games had been found out, while Mother Earth was in
her babyhood. When life is all sport, toil is the real play. There was
absolutely nothing to do. A little sweeping and dusting about the
cottage, I suppose, and the gathering of fresh flowers (which were only
too abundant everywhere), and arranging them in vases--and poor little
Pandora's day's work was over. And then, for the rest of the day, there
was the box!

After all, I am not quite sure that the box was not a blessing to her in
its way. It supplied her with such a variety of ideas to think of, and
to talk about, whenever she had anybody to listen! When she was in good
humour, she could admire the bright polish of its sides, and the rich
border of beautiful faces and foliage that ran all around it. Or, if she
chanced to be ill-tempered, she could give it a push, or kick it with
her naughty little foot. And many a kick did the box--(but it was a
mischievous box, as we shall see, and deserved all it got)--many a kick
did it receive. But, certain it is, if it had not been for the box, our
active-minded little Pandora would not have known half so well how to
spend her time as she now did.

For it was really an endless employment to guess what was inside. What
could it be, indeed? Just imagine, my little hearers, how busy your wits
would be, if there were a great box in the house, which, as you might
have reason to suppose, contained something new and pretty for your
Christmas or New Year's gifts. Do you think that you should be less
curious than Pandora? If you were left alone with the box, might you not
feel a little tempted to lift the lid? But you would not do it. Oh, fie!
No, no! Only, if you thought there were toys in it, it would be so very
hard to let slip an opportunity of taking just one peep! I know not
whether Pandora expected any toys; for none had yet begun to be made,
probably, in those days, when the world itself was one great plaything
for the children that dwelt upon it. But Pandora was convinced that
there was something very beautiful and valuable in the box; and
therefore she felt just as anxious to take a peep as any of these little
girls, here around me, would have felt. And, possibly, a little more so;
but of that I am not quite so certain.

On this particular day, however, which we have so long been talking
about her curiosity grew so much greater than it usually was, that, at
last, she approached the box. She was more than half determined to open
it, if she could. Ah, naughty Pandora!

First, however, she tried to lift it. It was heavy; quite too heavy for
the slender strength of a child like Pandora. She raised one end of the
box a few inches from the floor, and let it fall again, with a pretty
loud thump. A moment afterward, she almost fancied that she heard
something stir inside of the box. She applied her ear as closely as
possible, and listened. Positively, there did seem to be a kind of
stifled murmur within! Or was it merely the singing in Pandora's ears?
Or could it be the beating of her heart? The child could not quite
satisfy herself whether she had heard anything or no. But, at all
events, her curiosity was stronger than ever.

As she drew back her head, her eyes fell upon the knot of gold cord.

"It must have been a very ingenious person who tied this knot," said
Pandora to herself. "But I think I could untie it nevertheless. I am
resolved, at least, to find the two ends of the cord."

So she took the golden knot in her fingers, and pried into its
intricacies as sharply as she could. Almost without intending it, or
quite knowing what she was about, she was soon busily engaged in
attempting to undo it. Meanwhile, the bright sunshine came through the
open window; as did likewise the merry voices of the children, playing
at a distance, and perhaps the voice of Epimetheus among them. Pandora
stopped to listen. What a beautiful day it was! Would it not be wiser if
she were to let the troublesome knot alone, and think no more about the
box, but run and join her little playfellow and be happy?

All this time, however, her fingers were half unconsciously busy with
the knot; and happening to glance at the flower-wreathed face on the lid
of the enchanted box, she seemed to perceive it slyly grinning at her.

"That face looks very mischievous," thought Pandora. "I wonder whether
it smiles because I am doing wrong! I have the greatest mind in the
world to run away!"

But just then, by the merest accident, she gave the knot a kind of
twist, which produced a wonderful result. The gold cord untwined itself,
as if by magic, and left the box without a fastening.

"This is the strangest thing I ever knew!" said Pandora. "What will
Epimetheus say? And how can I possibly tie it up again?"

She made one or two attempts to restore the knot, but soon found it
quite beyond her skill. It had disentangled itself so suddenly that she
could not in the least remember how the strings had been doubled into
one another; and when she tried to recollect the shape and appearance of
the knot, it seemed to have gone entirely out of her mind. Nothing was
to be done, therefore, but to let the box remain as it was until
Epimetheus should come in.

"But," said Pandora, "when he finds the knot untied, he will know that I
have done it. How shall I make him believe that I have not looked into
the box?"

And then the thought came into her naughty little heart, that, since she
would be suspected of having looked into the box, she might just as well
do so at once. Oh, very naughty and very foolish Pandora! You should
have thought only of doing what was right, and of leaving undone what
was wrong, and not of what your playfellow Epimetheus would have said
or believed. And so perhaps she might, if the enchanted face on the lid
of the box had not looked so bewitchingly persuasive at her, and if she
had not seemed to hear, more distinctly, than before, the murmur of
small voices within. She could not tell whether it was fancy or no; but
there was quite a little tumult of whispers in her ear--or else it was
her curiosity that whispered:

"Let us out, dear Pandora--pray let us out! We will be such nice pretty
playfellows for you! Only let us out!"

"What can it be?" thought Pandora. "Is there something alive in the box?
Well--yes!--I am resolved to take just one peep! Only one peep; and then
the lid shall be shut down as safely as ever! There cannot possibly be
any harm in just one little peep!"

But it is now time for us to see what Epimetheus was doing.

This was the first time, since his little playmate had come to dwell
with him, that he had attempted to enjoy any pleasure in which she did
not partake. But nothing went right; nor was he nearly so happy as on
other days. He could not find a sweet grape or a ripe fig (if Epimetheus
had a fault, it was a little too much fondness for figs); or, if ripe at
all, they were overripe, and so sweet as to be cloying. There was no
mirth in his heart, such as usually made his voice gush out, of its own
accord, and swell the merriment of his companions. In short, he grew so
uneasy and discontented, that the other children could not imagine what
was the matter with Epimetheus. Neither did he himself know what ailed
him, any better than they did. For you must recollect that, at the time
we are speaking of, it was everybody's nature, and constant habit, to be
happy. The world had not yet learned to be otherwise. Not a single soul
or body, since these children were first sent to enjoy themselves on the
beautiful earth, had ever been sick or out of sorts.

At length, discovering that, somehow or other, he put a stop to all the
play, Epimetheus judged it best to go back to Pandora, who was in a
humour better suited to his own. But, with a hope of giving her
pleasure, he gathered some flowers, and made them into a wreath, which
he meant to put upon her head. The flowers were very lovely--roses, and
lilies, and orange blossoms, and a great many more, which left a trail
of fragrance behind, as Epimetheus carried them along; and the wreath
was put together with as much skill as could reasonably be expected of a
boy. The fingers of little girls, it has always appeared to me, are the
fittest to twine flower wreaths; but boys could do it, in those days,
rather better than they can now.

And here I must mention that a great black cloud had been gathering in
the sky, for some time past, although it had not yet overspread the sun.
But, just as Epimetheus reached the cottage door, this cloud began to
intercept the sunshine, and thus to make a sudden and sad obscurity.

He entered softly, for he meant, if possible, to steal behind Pandora,
and fling the wreath of flowers over her head, before she should be
aware of his approach. But, as it happened, there was no need of his
treading so very lightly. He might have trod as heavily as he
pleased--as heavily as a grown man--as heavily, I was going to say, as
an elephant--without much probability of Pandora's hearing his
footsteps. She was too intent upon her purpose. At the moment of his
entering the cottage, the naughty child had put her hand to the lid,
and was on the point of opening the mysterious box. Epimetheus beheld
her. If he had cried out, Pandora would probably have withdrawn her
hand, and the fatal mystery of the box might never have been known.

But Epimetheus himself, although he said very little about it, had his
own share of curiosity to know what was inside. Perceiving that Pandora
was resolved to find out the secret, he determined that his playfellow
should not be the only wise person in the cottage. And if there were
anything pretty or valuable in the box, he meant to take half of it to
himself. Thus, after all his sage speeches to Pandora about restraining
her curiosity, Epimetheus turned out to be quite as foolish, and nearly
as much in fault as she. So, whenever we blame Pandora for what
happened, we must not forget to shake our heads at Epimetheus likewise.

As Pandora raised the lid, the cottage grew very dark and dismal; for
the black cloud had now swept quite over the sun, and seemed to have
buried it alive. There had for a little while past been a low growling
and muttering, which all at once broke into a heavy peal of thunder. But
Pandora, heeding nothing of all this, lifted the lid nearly upright, and
looked inside. It seemed as if a sudden swarm of winged creatures
brushed past her, taking flight out of the box, while, at the same
instant, she heard the voice of Epimetheus, with a lamentable tone, as
if he were in pain.

"Oh, I am stung!" cried he. "I am stung! Naughty Pandora! why have you
opened this wicked box?"

Pandora let fall the lid, and, starting up, looked about her, to see
what had befallen Epimetheus. The thunder cloud had so darkened the room
that she could not very clearly discern what was in it. But she heard a
disagreeable buzzing, as if a great many huge flies, or gigantic
mosquitoes, or those insects which we call dor bugs, and pinching dogs,
were darting about. And, as her eyes grew more accustomed to the
imperfect light, she saw a crowd of ugly little shapes, with bats'
wings, looking abominably spiteful, and armed with terribly long stings
in their tails. It was one of these that had stung Epimetheus. Nor was
it a great while before Pandora herself began to scream, in no less pain
and affright than her playfellow, and making a vast deal more hubbub
about it. An odious little monster had settled on her forehead, and
would have stung her I know not how deeply, if Epimetheus had not run
and brushed it away.

Now, if you wish to know what these ugly things might be, which had made
their escape out of the box, I must tell you that they were the whole
family of earthly Troubles. There were evil Passions; there were a great
many species of Cares; there were more than a hundred and fifty Sorrows;
there were Diseases, in a vast number of miserable and painful shapes;
there were more kinds of Naughtiness than it would be of any use to talk
about. In short, everything that has since afflicted the souls and
bodies of mankind had been shut up in the mysterious box, and given to
Epimetheus and Pandora to be kept safely, in order that the happy
children of the world might never be molested by them. Had they been
faithful to their trust, all would have gone well. No grown person would
ever have been sad, nor any child have had cause to shed a single tear,
from that hour until this moment.

But--and you may see by this how a wrong act of any one mortal is a
calamity to the whole world--by Pandora's lifting the lid of that
miserable box, and by the fault of Epimetheus, too, in not preventing
her, these Troubles have obtained a foothold among us, and do not seem
very likely to be driven away in a hurry. For it was impossible, as you
will easily guess, that the two children should keep the ugly swarms in
their own little cottage. On the contrary, the first thing that they did
was to fling open the doors and windows, in hopes of getting rid of
them; and, sure enough, away flew the winged Troubles all abroad, and so
pestered and tormented the small people, everywhere about, that none of
them so much as smiled for many days afterward. And, what was very
singular, all the flowers and dewy blossoms on earth not one of which
had hitherto faded, now began to droop and shed their leaves, after a
day or two. The children, moreover, who before seemed immortal in their
childhood, now grew older, day by day, and came soon to be youths and
maidens, and men and women by and by, and aged people, before they
dreamed of such a thing.

Meanwhile, the naughty Pandora, and hardly less naughty Epimetheus,
remained in their cottage. Both of them had been grievously stung, and
were in a good deal of pain, which seemed the more intolerable to them,
because it was the very first pain that had ever been felt since the
world began. Of course, they were entirely unaccustomed to it, and could
have no idea what it meant. Besides all this, they were in exceedingly
bad humour, both with themselves and with one another. In order to
indulge it to the utmost, Epimetheus sat down sullenly in a corner with
his back toward Pandora; while Pandora flung herself upon the floor and
rested her head on the fatal and abominable box. She was crying
bitterly, and sobbing as if her heart would break.

Suddenly there was a gentle little tap on the inside of the lid.

"What can that be?" cried Pandora, lifting her head.

But either Epimetheus had not heard the tap, or was too much out of
humour to notice it. At any rate, he made no answer.

"You are very unkind," said Pandora, sobbing anew, "not to speak to me!"

Again the tap! It sounded like the tiny knuckles of a fairy's hand,
knocking lightly and playfully on the inside of the box.

"Who are you?" asked Pandora, with a little of her former curiosity.
"Who are you, inside of this naughty box?"

A sweet little voice spoke from within--

"Only lift the lid, and you shall see."

"No, no," answered Pandora, again beginning to sob, "I have had enough
of lifting the lid! You are inside of the box, naughty creature, and
there you shall stay! There are plenty of your ugly brothers and sisters
already flying about the world. You need never think that I shall be so
foolish as to let you out!"

She looked toward Epimetheus, as she spoke, perhaps expecting that he
would commend her for her wisdom. But the sullen boy only muttered that
she was wise a little too late.

"Ah," said the sweet little voice again, "you had much better let me
out. I am not like those naughty creatures that have stings in their
tails. They are no brothers and sisters of mine, as you would see at
once, if you were only to get a glimpse of me. Come, come, my pretty
Pandora! I am sure you will let me out!"

And, indeed, there was a kind of cheerful witchery in the tone, that
made it almost impossible to refuse anything which this little voice
asked. Pandora's heart had insensibly grown lighter, at every word that
came from within the box. Epimetheus, too, though still in the corner,
had turned half round, and seemed to be in rather better spirits than
before.

"My dear Epimetheus," cried Pandora, "have you heard this little voice?"

"Yes, to be sure I have," answered he, but in no very good humour as
yet. "And what of it?"

"Shall I lift the lid again?" asked Pandora.

"Just as you please," said Epimetheus. "You have done so much mischief
already, that perhaps you may as well do a little more. One other
Trouble, in such a swarm as you have set adrift about the world, can
make no very great difference."

"You might speak a little more kindly!" murmured Pandora, wiping her
eyes.

"Ah, naughty boy!" cried the little voice within the box, in an arch and
laughing tone. "He knows he is longing to see me. Come, my dear Pandora,
lift up the lid. I am in a great hurry to comfort you. Only let me have
some fresh air, and you shall soon see that matters are not quite so
dismal as you think them!"

"Epimetheus," exclaimed Pandora, "come what may, I am resolved to open
the box!"

"And, as the lid seems very heavy," cried Epimetheus, running across the
room, "I will help you!"

So, with one consent, the two children again lifted the lid. Out flew a
sunny and smiling little personage, and Hovered about the room, throwing
a light wherever she went. Have you never made the sunshine dance into
dark corners, by reflecting it from a bit of looking glass? Well, so
looked the winged cheerfulness of this fairy-like stranger, amid the
gloom of the cottage. She flew to Epimetheus, and laid the least touch
of her finger on the inflamed spot where the Trouble had stung him, and
immediately the anguish of it was gone. Then she kissed Pandora on the
forehead, and her hurt was cured likewise.

After performing these good offices, the bright stranger fluttered
sportively over the children's heads, and looked so sweetly at them,
that they both began to think it not so very much amiss to have opened
the box, since, otherwise, their cheery guest must have been kept a
prisoner among those naughty imps with stings in their tails.

"Pray, who are you, beautiful creature?" inquired Pandora.

"I am to be called Hope!" answered the sunshiny figure. "And because I
am such a cheery little body, I was packed into the box, to make amends
to the human race for that swarm of ugly Troubles, which was destined to
be let loose among them. Never fear I we shall do pretty well in spite
of them all."

"Your wings are coloured like the rainbow!" exclaimed Pandora. "How very
beautiful!"

"Yes, they are like the rainbow," said Hope, "because, glad as my nature
is, I am partly made of tears as well as smiles."

"And will you stay with us," asked Epimetheus, "forever and ever?"

"As long as you need me," said Hope, with her pleasant smile--"and that
will be as long as you live in the world--I promise never to desert you.
There may come times and seasons, now and then, when you will think
that I have utterly vanished. But again, and again, and again, when
perhaps you least dream of it, you shall see the glimmer of my wings on
the ceiling of your cottage. Yes, my dear children, and I know something
very good and beautiful that is to be given you hereafter!"

"Oh tell us," they exclaimed--"tell us what it is!"

"Do not ask me," replied Hope, putting her finger on her rosy mouth.
"But do not despair, even if it should never happen while you live on
this earth. Trust in my promise, for it is true."

"We do trust you!" cried Epimetheus and Pandora, both in one breath.

And so they did; and not only they, but so has everybody trusted Hope,
that has since been alive. And to tell you the truth, I cannot help
being glad--(though, to be sure, it was an uncommonly naughty thing for
her to do)--but I cannot help being glad that our foolish Pandora peeped
into the box. No doubt--no doubt--the Troubles are still flying about
the world, and have increased in multitude, rather than lessened, and
are a very ugly set of imps, and carry most venomous stings in their
tails. I have felt them already, and expect to feel them more, as I grow
older. But then that lovely and lightsome little figure of Hope! What in
the world could we do without her? Hope spiritualises the earth; Hope
makes it always new; and, even in the earth's best and brightest aspect,
Hope shows it to be only the shadow of an infinite bliss hereafter!




CHAPTER IX

THE CYCLOPS


When the great city of Troy was taken, all the chiefs who had fought
against it set sail for their homes. But there was wrath in heaven
against them, for indeed they had borne themselves haughtily and cruelly
in the day of their victory. Therefore they did not all find a safe and
happy return. For one was shipwrecked, and another was shamefully slain
by his false wife in his palace, and others found all things at home
troubled and changed, and were driven to seek new dwellings elsewhere.
And some, whose wives and friends and people had been still true to them
through those ten long years of absence, were driven far and wide about
the world before they saw their native land again. And of all, the wise
Ulysses was he who wandered farthest and suffered most.

He was well-nigh the last to sail, for he had tarried many days to do
pleasure to Agamemnon, lord of all the Greeks. Twelve ships he had with
him--twelve he had brought to Troy--and in each there were some fifty
men, being scarce half of those that had sailed in them in the old days,
so many valiant heroes slept the last sleep by Simoïs and Scamander, and
in the plain and on the seashore, slain in battle or by the shafts of
Apollo.

First they sailed northwest to the Thracian coast, where the Ciconians
dwelt, who had helped the men of Troy. Their city they took, and in it
much plunder, slaves and oxen, and jars of fragrant wine, and might
have escaped unhurt, but that they stayed to hold revel on the shore.
For the Ciconians gathered their neighbours, being men of the same
blood, and did battle with the invaders, and drove them to their ship.
And when Ulysses numbered his men, he found that he had lost six out of
each ship.

Scarce had he set out again when the wind began to blow fiercely; so,
seeing a smooth sandy beach, they drave the ships ashore and dragged
them out of reach of the waves, and waited till the storm should abate.
And the third morning being fair, they sailed again, and journeyed
prosperously till they came to the very end of the great Peloponnesian
land, where Cape Malea looks out upon the southern sea. But contrary
currents baffled them, so that they could not round it, and the north
wind blew so strongly that they must fain drive before it. And on the
tenth day they came to the land where the lotus grows--a wondrous fruit,
of which whosoever eats cares not to see country or wife or children
again. Now the Lotus eaters, for so they call the people of the land,
were a kindly folk, and gave of the fruit to some of the sailors, not
meaning them any harm, but thinking it to be the best that they had to
give. These, when they had eaten, said that they would not sail any more
over the sea; which, when the wise Ulysses heard, he bade their comrades
bind them and carry them, sadly complaining, to the ships.

Then, the wind having abated, they took to their oars, and rowed for
many days till they came to the country where the Cyclopes dwell. Now, a
mile or so from the shore there was an island, very fair and fertile,
but no man dwells there or tills the soil, and in the island a harbour
where a ship may be safe from all winds, and at the head of the harbour
a stream falling from the rock, and whispering alders all about it. Into
this the ships passed safely, and were hauled up on the beach, and the
crews slept by them, waiting for the morning. And the next day they
hunted the wild goats, of which there was great store on the island, and
feasted right merrily on what they caught, with draughts of red wine
which they had carried off from the town of the Ciconians.

But on the morrow, Ulysses, for he was ever fond of adventure, and would
know of every land to which he came what manner of men they were that
dwelt there, took one of his twelve ships and bade row to the land.
There was a great hill sloping to the shore, and there rose up here and
there a smoke from the caves where the Cyclopes dwelt apart, holding no
converse with each other, for they were a rude and savage folk, but
ruled each his own household, not caring for others. Now very close to
the shore was one of these caves, very huge and deep, with laurels round
about the mouth, and in front a fold with walls built of rough stone,
and shaded by tall oaks and pines. So Ulysses chose out of the crew the
twelve bravest, and bade the rest guard the ship, and went to see what
manner of dwelling this was, and who abode there. He had his sword by
his side, and on his shoulder a mighty skin of wine, sweet smelling and
strong, with which he might win the heart of some fierce savage, should
he chance to meet with such, as indeed his prudent heart forecasted that
he might.

So they entered the cave, and judged that it was the dwelling of some
rich and skilful shepherd. For within there were pens for the young of
the sheep and of the goats, divided all according to their age, and
there were baskets full of cheeses, and full milkpails ranged along the
wall. But the Cyclops himself was away in the pastures. Then the
companions of Ulysses besought him that he would depart, taking with
him, if he would, a store of cheeses and sundry of the lambs and of the
kids. But he would not, for he wished to see, after his wont, what
manner of host this strange shepherd might be. And truly he saw it to
his cost!

It was evening when the Cyclops came home, a mighty giant, twenty feet
in height, or more. On his shoulder he bore a vast bundle of pine logs
for his fire, and threw them down outside the cave with a great crash,
and drove the flocks within, and closed the entrance with a huge rock,
which twenty wagons and more could not bear. Then he milked the ewes and
all the she goats, and half of the milk he curdled for cheese, and half
he set ready for himself, when he should sup. Next he kindled a fire
with the pine logs, and the flame lighted up all the cave, showing him
Ulysses and his comrades.

"Who are ye?" cried Polyphemus, for that was the giant's name. "Are ye
traders, or, haply, pirates?"

For in those days it was not counted shame to be called a pirate.

Ulysses shuddered at the dreadful voice and shape, but bore him bravely,
and answered, "We are no pirates, mighty sir, but Greeks, sailing back
from Troy, and subjects of the great King Agamemnon, whose fame is
spread from one end of heaven to the other. And we are come to beg
hospitality of thee in the name of Zeus, who rewards or punishes hosts
and guests according as they be faithful the one to the other, or no."

"Nay," said the giant, "it is but idle talk to tell me of Zeus and the
other gods. We Cyclopes take no account of gods, holding ourselves to
be much better and stronger than they. But come, tell me where have you
left your ship?"

But Ulysses saw his thought when he asked about the ship, how he was
minded to break it, and take from them all hope of flight. Therefore he
answered him craftily:

"Ship have we none, for that which was ours King Poseidon brake, driving
it on a jutting rock on this coast, and we whom thou seest are all that
are escaped from the waves."

Polyphemus answered nothing, but without more ado caught up two of the
men, as a man might catch up the whelps of a dog, and dashed them on the
ground, and tore them limb from limb, and devoured them, with huge
draughts of milk between, leaving not a morsel, not even the very bones.
But the others, when they saw the dreadful deed, could only weep and
pray to Zeus for help. And when the giant had ended his foul meal, he
lay down among his sheep and slept.

Then Ulysses questioned much in his heart whether he should slay the
monster as he slept, for he doubted not that his good sword would pierce
to the giant's heart, mighty as he was. But, being very wise, he
remembered that, should he slay him, he and his comrades would yet
perish miserably. For who should move away the great rock that lay
against the door of the cave? So they waited till the morning. And the
monster woke, and milked his flocks, and afterward, seizing two men,
devoured them for his meal. Then he went to the pastures, but put the
great rock on the mouth of the cave, just as a man puts down the lid
upon his quiver.

All that day the wise Ulysses was thinking what he might best do to save
himself and his companions, and the end of his thinking was this: There
was a mighty pole in the cave, green wood of an olive tree, big as a
ship's mast, which Polyphemus purposed to use, when the smoke should
have dried it, as a walking staff. Of this he cut off a fathom's length,
and his comrades sharpened it and hardened it in the fire, and then hid
it away. At evening the giant came back, and drove his sheep into the
cave, nor left the rams outside, as he had been wont to do before, but
shut them in. And having duly done his shepherd's work, he made his
cruel feast as before. Then Ulysses came forward with the wine skin in
his hand, and said:

"Drink, Cyclops, now that thou hast feasted. Drink, and see what
precious things we had in our ship. But no one hereafter will come to
thee with such like, if thou dealest with strangers as cruelly as thou
hast dealt with us."

Then the Cyclops drank, and was mightily pleased, and said, "Give me
again to drink, and tell me thy name, stranger, and I will give thee a
gift such as a host should give. In good truth this is a rare liquor.
We, too, have vines, but they bear not wine like this, which indeed must
be such as the gods drink in heaven."

Then Ulysses gave him the cup again, and he drank. Thrice he gave it to
him, and thrice he drank, not knowing what it was, and how it would work
within his brain.

Then Ulysses spake to him. "Thou didst ask my name, Cyclops. Lo! my name
is No Man. And now that thou knowest my name, thou shouldst give me thy
gift."

And he said, "My gift shall be that I will eat thee last of all thy
company."

And as he spake he fell back in a drunken sleep. Then Ulysses bade his
comrades be of good courage, for the time was come when they should be
delivered. And they thrust the stake of olive wood into the fire till it
was ready, green as it was, to burst into flame, and they thrust it into
the monster's eye; for he had but one eye, and that in the midst of his
forehead, with the eyebrow below it. And Ulysses leant with all his
force upon the stake, and thrust it in with might and main. And the
burning wood hissed in the eye, just as the red-hot iron hisses in the
water when a man seeks to temper steel for a sword.

Then the giant leapt up, and tore away the stake, and cried aloud, so
that all the Cyclopes who dwelt on the mountain side heard him and came
about his cave, asking him, "What aileth thee, Polyphemus, that thou
makest this uproar in the peaceful night, driving away sleep? Is any one
robbing thee of thy sheep, or seeking to slay thee by craft or force?"

And the giant answered, "No Man slays me by craft."

"Nay, but," they said, "if no man does thee wrong, we cannot help thee.
The sickness which great Zeus may send, who can avoid? Pray to our
father, Poseidon, for help."

Then they departed; and Ulysses was glad at heart for the good success
of his device, when he said that he was No Man.

But the Cyclops rolled away the great stone from the door of the cave,
and sat in the midst stretching out his hands, to feel whether perchance
the men within the cave would seek to go out among the sheep.

Long did Ulysses think how he and his comrades should best escape. At
last he lighted upon a good device, and much he thanked Zeus for that
this once the giant had driven the rams with the other sheep into the
cave. For, these being great and strong, he fastened his comrades under
the bellies of the beasts, tying them with osier twigs, of which the
giant made his bed. One ram he took, and fastened a man beneath it, and
two others he set, one on either side. So he did with the six, for but
six were left out of the twelve who had ventured with him from the ship.
And there was one mighty ram, far larger than all the others, and to
this Ulysses clung, grasping the fleece tight with both his hands. So
they waited for the morning. And when the morning came, the rams rushed
forth to the pasture; but the giant sat in the door and felt the back of
each as it went by, nor thought to try what might be underneath. Last of
all went the great ram. And the Cyclops knew him as he passed and said:

"How is this, thou, who art the leader of the flock? Thou art not wont
thus to lag behind. Thou hast always been the first to run to the
pastures and streams in the morning, and the first to come back to the
fold when evening fell; and now thou art last of all. Perhaps thou art
troubled about thy master's eye, which some wretch--No Man, they call
him--has destroyed, having first mastered me with wine. He has not
escaped, I ween. I would that thou couldst speak, and tell me where he
is lurking. Of a truth I would dash out his brains upon the ground, and
avenge me of this No Man."

So speaking, he let him pass out of the cave. But when they were out of
reach of the giant, Ulysses loosed his hold of the ram, and then unbound
his comrades. And they hastened to their ship, not forgetting to drive
before them a good store of the Cyclops' fat sheep. Right glad were
those that had abode by the ship to see them. Nor did they lament for
those that had died, though they were fain to do so, for Ulysses
forbade, fearing lest the noise of their weeping should betray them to
the giant, where they were. Then they all climbed into the ship, and
sitting well in order on the benches, smote the sea with their oars,
laying-to right lustily, that they might the sooner get away from the
accursed land. And when they had rowed a hundred yards or so, so that a
man's voice could yet be heard by one who stood upon the shore, Ulysses
stood up in the ship and shouted:

"He was no coward, O Cyclops, whose comrades thou didst so foully slay
in thy den. Justly art thou punished, monster, that devourest thy guests
in thy dwelling. May the gods make thee suffer yet worse things than
these!"

Then the Cylops, in his wrath, broke off the top of a great hill, a
mighty rock, and hurled it where he had heard the voice. Right in front
of the ship's bow it fell, and a great wave rose as it sank, and washed
the ship back to the shore. But Ulysses seized a long pole with both
hands and pushed the ship from the land, and bade his comrades ply their
oars, nodding with his head, for he was too wise to speak, lest the
Cyclops should know where they were. Then they rowed with all their
might and main.

And when they had gotten twice as far as before, Ulysses made as if he
would speak again; but his comrades sought to hinder him, saying, "Nay,
my lord, anger not the giant any more. Surely we thought before we were
lost, when he threw the great rock, and washed our ship back to the
shore. And if he hear thee now, he may crush our ship and us, for the
man throws a mighty bolt, and throws it far."

But Ulysses would not be persuaded, but stood up and said, "Hear,
Cyclops! If any man ask who blinded thee, say that it was the warrior
Ulysses, son of Laertes, dwelling in Ithaca."

And the Cyclops answered with a groan, "Of a truth, the old oracles are
fulfilled, for long ago there came to this land one Telemus, a prophet,
and dwelt among us even to old age. This man foretold me that one
Ulysses would rob me of my sight. But I looked for a great man and a
strong, who should subdue me by force, and now a weakling has done the
deed, having cheated me with wine. But come thou hither, Ulysses, and I
will be a host indeed to thee. Or, at least, may Poseidon give thee such
a voyage to thy home as I would wish thee to have. For know that
Poseidon is my sire. May be that he may heal me of my grievous wound."

And Ulysses said, "Would to God, I could send thee down to the abode of
the dead, where thou wouldst be past all healing, even from Poseidon's
self."

Then Cyclops lifted up his hands to Poseidon and prayed:

"Hear me, Poseidon, if I am indeed thy son and thou my father. May this
Ulysses never reach his home! or, if the Fates have ordered that he
should reach it, may he come alone, all his comrades lost, and come to
find sore trouble in his house!"

And as he ended he hurled another mighty rock, which almost lighted on
the rudder's end, yet missed it as if by a hair's breadth. So Ulysses
and his comrades escaped, and came to the island of the wild goats,
where they found their comrades, who indeed had waited long for them, in
sore fear lest they had perished. Then Ulysses divided among his company
all the sheep which they had taken from the Cyclops. And all, with one
consent, gave him for his share the great ram which had carried him out
of the cave, and he sacrificed it to Zeus. And all that day they feasted
right merrily on the flesh of sheep and on sweet wine, and when the
night was come, they lay down upon the shore and slept.




CHAPTER X

THE ARGONAUTS


I

_How the Centaur Trained the Heroes on Pelion_

I have told you of a hero who fought with wild beasts and with wild men;
but now I have a tale of heroes who sailed away into a distant land to
win themselves renown forever, in the adventure of the Golden Fleece.

Whither they sailed, my children, I cannot clearly tell. It all happened
long ago; so long that it has all grown dim, like a dream which you
dreamed last year. And why they went, I cannot tell; some say that it
was to win gold. It may be so; but the noblest deeds which have been
done on earth, have not been done for gold. It was not for the sake of
gold that the Lord came down and died, and the Apostles went out to
preach the good news in all lands. The Spartans looked for no reward in
money when they fought and died at Thermopylæ; and Socrates the wise
asked no pay from his countrymen, but lived poor and barefoot all his
days, only caring to make men good. And there are heroes in our days
also, who do noble deeds, but not for gold. Our discoverers did not go
to make themselves rich, when they sailed out one after another into the
dreary frozen seas; nor did the ladies, who went out last year, to
drudge in the hospitals of the East, making themselves poor, that they
might be rich in noble works. And young men, too, whom you know,
children, and some of them of your own kin, did they say to themselves,
"How much money shall I earn?" when they went out to the war, leaving
wealth, and comfort, and a pleasant home, and all that money can give,
to face hunger and thirst, and wounds and death, that they might fight
for their country and their Queen? No, children, there is a better thing
on earth than wealth, a better thing than life itself; and that is, to
have done something before you die, for which good men may honour you,
and God your Father smile upon your work.

Therefore we will believe--why should we not--of these same Argonauts of
old, that they, too, were noble men, who planned and did a noble deed;
and that therefore their fame has lived, and been told in story and in
song, mixed up, no doubt, with dreams and fables, yet true and right at
heart. So we will honour these old Argonauts, and listen to their story
as it stands; and we will try to be like them, each of us in our place;
for each of us has a Golden Fleece to seek, and a wild sea to sail over,
ere we reach it, and dragons to fight ere it be ours.

And what was that first Golden Fleece? I do not know, nor care. The old
Hellenes said that it hung in Colchis, which we call the Circassian
coast, nailed to a beech tree in the war-god's wood; and that it was the
fleece of the wondrous ram, who bore Phrixus and Helle across the Euxine
Sea. For Phrixus and Helle were the children of the cloud nymph, and of
Athamas the Minuan king. And when a famine came upon the land, their
cruel stepmother, Ino, wished to kill them, that her own children might
reign, and said that they must be sacrificed on an altar, to turn away
the anger of the gods. So the poor children were brought to the altar,
and the priest stood ready with his knife, when out of the clouds came
the Golden Ram, and took them on his back, and vanished. Then madness
came upon that foolish king Athamas, and ruin upon Ino and her children.
For Athamas killed one of them in his fury, and Ino fled from him with
the other in her arms, and leaped from a cliff into the sea, and was
changed into a dolphin, such as you have seen, which wanders over the
waves forever sighing, with its little one clasped to its breast.

But the people drove out King Athamas, because he had killed his child;
and he roamed about in his misery, till he came to the Oracle in Delphi.
And the Oracle told him that he must wander for his sin, till the wild
beasts should feast him as their guest. So he went on in hunger and
sorrow for many a weary day, till he saw a pack of wolves. The wolves
were tearing a sheep; but when they saw Athamas they fled, and left the
sheep for him, and he ate of it; and then he knew that the oracle was
fulfilled at last. So he wandered no more; but settled, and built a
town, and became a king again.

But the ram carried the two children far away over land and sea, till he
came to the Thracian Chersonese, and there Helle fell into the sea. So
those narrow straits are called "Hellespont," after her; and they bear
that name until this day.

Then the ram flew on with Phrixus to the northeast across the sea which
we call the Black Sea now; but the Hellenes called it Euxine. And at
last, they say, he stopped at Colchis, on the steep Circassian coast;
and there Phrixus married Chalchiope, the daughter of Aietes the king;
and offered the ram in sacrifice; and Aietes nailed the ram's fleece to
a beech, in the grove of Ares the war god.

And after awhile Phrixus died, and was buried, but his spirit had no
rest; for he was buried far from his native land, and the pleasant hills
of Hellas. So he came in dreams to the heroes of the Minuai, and called
sadly by their beds: "Come and set my spirit free, that I may go home to
my fathers and to my kinsfolk, and the pleasant Minuan land."

And they asked: "How shall we set your spirit free?"

"You must sail over the sea to Colchis, and bring home the golden
fleece; and then my spirit will come back with it, and I shall sleep
with my fathers and have rest."

He came thus, and called to them often, but when they woke they looked
at each other, and said: "Who dare sail to Colchis, or bring home the
golden fleece?" And in all the country none was brave enough to try it;
for the man and the time were not come.

Phrixus had a cousin called Æson, who was king in Iolcos by the sea.
There he ruled over the rich Minuan heroes, as Athamas his uncle ruled
in Bœotia; and like Athamas, he was an unhappy man. For he had a
stepbrother named Pelias, of whom some said that he was a nymph's son,
and there were dark and sad tales about his birth. When he was a babe he
was cast out on the mountains, and a wild mare came by and kicked him.
But a shepherd passing found the baby, with its face all blackened by
the blow; and took him home, and called him Pelias, because his face was
bruised and black. And he grew up fierce and lawless, and did many a
fearful deed; and at last he drove out Æson his stepbrother, and then
his own brother Neleus, and took the kingdom to himself, and ruled over
the rich Minuan heroes, in Iolcos by the sea.

And Æson, when he was driven out, went sadly away out of the town,
leading his little son by the hand; and he said to himself, "I must hide
the child in the mountains; or Pelias will surely kill him, because he
is the heir."

So he went up from the sea across the valley, through the vineyards and
the olive groves, and across the torrent of Anauros, toward Pelion the
ancient mountain, whose brows are white with snow.

He went up and up into the mountain over marsh, and crag, and down, till
the boy was tired and footsore, and Æson had to bear him in his arms,
till he came to the mouth of a lonely cave, at the foot of a mighty
cliff.

Above the cliff the snow wreaths hung, dripping and cracking in the sun.
But at its foot around the cave's mouth grew all fair flowers and herbs,
as if in a garden, ranged in order, each sort by itself. There they grew
gayly in the sunshine, and the spray of the torrent from above; while
from the cave came the sound of music, and a man's voice singing to the
harp.

Then Æson put down the lad, and whispered:

"Fear not, but go in, and whomsoever you shall find, lay your hands upon
his knees, and say, 'In the name of Zeus the father of gods and men, I
am your guest from this day forth.'"

Then the lad went in without trembling, for he, too, was a hero's son;
but when he was within, he stopped in wonder, to listen to that magic
song.

And there he saw the singer lying upon bear skins and fragrant boughs;
Cheiron, the ancient centaur, the wisest of all things beneath the sky.
Down to the waist he was a man; but below he was a noble horse; his
white hair rolled down over his broad shoulders, and his white beard
over his broad brown chest; and his eyes were wise and mild, and his
forehead like a mountain wall.

And in his hands he held a harp of gold, and struck it with a golden
key; and as he struck, he sang till his eyes glittered, and filled all
the cave with light.

And he sang of the birth of Time, and of the heavens and the dancing
stars; and of the ocean, and the ether, and the fire, and the shaping of
the wondrous earth. And he sang of the treasures of the hills, and the
hidden jewels of the mine, and the veins of fire and metal, and the
virtues of all healing herbs, and of the speech of birds, and of
prophecy, and of hidden things to come.

Then he sang of health, and strength, and manhood, and a valiant heart;
and of music, and hunting, and wrestling, and all the games which heroes
love; and of travel, and wars, and sieges, and a noble death in fight;
and then he sang of peace and plenty, and of equal justice in the land;
and as he sang, the boy listened wide eyed, and forgot his errand in the
song.

And at the last old Cheiron was silent, and called the lad with a soft
voice.

And the lad ran trembling to him, and would have laid his hands upon his
knees; but Cheiron smiled, and said, "Call hither your father Æson, for
I know you, and all that has befallen, and saw you both afar in the
valley, even before you left the town."

Then Æson came in sadly, and Cheiron asked him, "Why came you not
yourself to me, Æson the Æolid?"

And Æson said:

"I thought, Cheiron will pity the lad if he sees him come alone; and I
wished to try whether he was fearless, and dare venture like a hero's
son. But now I entreat you by Father Zeus, let the boy be your guest
till better times, and train him among the sons of the heroes, that he
may avenge his father's house."

Then Cheiron smiled, and drew the lad to him, and laid his hand upon his
golden locks, and said, "Are you afraid of my horse's hoofs, fair boy,
or will you be my pupil from this day?"

"I would gladly have horse's hoofs like you, if I could sing such songs
as yours."

And Cheiron laughed, and said, "Sit here by me till sundown, when your
playfellows will come home, and you shall learn like them to be a king,
worthy to rule over gallant men."

Then he turned to Æson, and said, "Go back in peace, and bend before the
storm like a prudent man. This boy shall not cross the Anauros again,
till he has become a glory to you and to the house of Æolus."

And Æson wept over his son and went away; but the boy did not weep, so
full was his fancy of that strange cave, and the Centaur, and his song,
and the playfellows whom he was to see.

Then Cheiron put the lyre into his hands, and taught him how to play it,
till the sun sank low behind the cliff, and a shout was heard outside.

And then in came the sons of the heroes, Æneas, and Heracles, and
Peleus, and many another mighty name.

And great Cheiron leapt up joyfully, and his hoofs made the cave
resound, as they shouted, "Come out, Father Cheiron; come out and see
our game." And one cried, "I have killed two deer," and another, "I took
a wildcat among the crags"; and Heracles dragged a wild goat after him
by its horns, for he was as huge as a mountain crag; and Cæneus carried
a bear cub under each arm, and laughed when they scratched and bit; for
neither tooth nor steel could wound him.

And Cheiron praised them all, each according to his deserts.

Only one walked apart and silent, Asclepius, the too-wise child, with
his bosom full of herbs and flowers, and round his wrist a spotted
snake; he came with downcast eyes to Cheiron, and whispered how he had
watched the snake cast his old skin, and grow young again before his
eyes, and how he had gone down into a village in the vale, and cured a
dying man with a herb which he had seen a sick goat eat.

And Cheiron smiled, and said: "To each Athené and Apollo give some gift,
and each is worthy in his place; but to this child they have given an
honour beyond all honours, to cure while others kill."

Then the lads brought in wood, and split it, and lighted a blazing fire;
and others skinned the deer and quartered them, and set them to roast
before the fire; and while the venison was cooking they bathed in the
snow torrent, and washed away the dust and sweat.

And then all ate till they could eat no more (for they had tasted
nothing since the dawn), and drank of the clear spring water, for wine
is not fit for growing lads. And when the remnants were put away, they
all lay down upon the skins and leaves about the fire, and each took the
lyre in turn, and sang and played with all his heart.

And after a while they all went out to a plot of grass at the cave's
mouth, and there they boxed, and ran, and wrestled, and laughed till the
stones fell from the cliffs.

Then Cheiron took his lyre, and all the lads joined hands; and as he
played, they danced to his measure, in and out, and round and round.
There they danced hand in hand, till the night fell over land and sea,
while the black glen shone with their broad white limbs, and the gleam
of their golden hair.

And the lad danced with them, delighted, and then slept a wholesome
sleep, upon fragrant leaves of bay, and myrtle, and marjoram, and
flowers of thyme; and rose at the dawn, and bathed in the torrent, and
became a schoolfellow to the heroes' sons, and forgot Iolcos, and his
father, and all his former life. But he grew strong, and brave and
cunning, upon the pleasant downs of Pelion, in the keen hungry mountain
air. And he learnt to wrestle, and to box, and to hunt, and to play upon
the harp; and next he learnt to ride, for old Cheiron used to mount him
on his back; and he learnt the virtues of all herbs, and how to cure all
wounds; and Cheiron called him Jason the healer, and that is his name
until this day.


PART II

_How Jason Lost His Sandal in Anauros_

And ten years came and went, and Jason was grown to be a mighty man.
Some of his fellows were gone, and some were growing up by his side.
Asclepius was gone into Peloponnese, to work his wondrous cures on men;
and some say he used to raise the dead to life. And Heracles was gone to
Thebes, to fulfil those famous labours which have become a proverb among
men. And Peleus had married a sea nymph, and his wedding is famous to
this day. And Æneas was gone home to Troy, and many a noble tale you
will read of him, and of all the other gallant heroes, the scholars of
Cheiron the just. And it happened on a day that Jason stood on the
mountain, and looked north and south and east and west; and Cheiron
stood by him and watched him, for he knew that the time was come.

And Jason looked and saw the plains of Thessaly, where the Lapithai
breed their horses; and the lake of Boibé, and the stream which runs
northward to Peneus and Tempe; and he looked north, and saw the mountain
wall which guards the Magnesian shore; Olympus, the seat of the
Immortals, and Ossa, and Pelion, where he stood. Then he looked east and
saw the bright blue sea, which stretched away forever toward the dawn.
Then he looked south, and saw a pleasant land, with white-walled towns
and farms, nestling along the shore of a land-locked bay, while the
smoke rose blue among the trees; and he knew it for the bay of Pagasai,
and the rich lowlands of Hæmonia, and Iolcos by the sea.

Then he sighed, and asked: "Is it true what the heroes tell me, that I
am heir of that fair land?"

"And what good would it be to you, Jason, if you were heir of that fair
land?"

"I would take it and keep it."

"A strong man has taken it and kept it long. Are you stronger than
Pelias the terrible?"

"I can try my strength with his," said Jason. But Cheiron sighed and
said:

"You have many a danger to go through before you rule in Iolcos by the
sea; many a danger, and many a woe; and strange troubles in strange
lands, such as man never saw before."

"The happier I," said Jason, "to see what man never saw before."

And Cheiron sighed again, and said: "The eaglet must leave the nest when
it is fledged. Will you go to Iolcos by the sea? Then promise me two
things before you go."

Jason promised, and Cheiron answered: "Speak harshly to no soul whom you
may meet, and stand by the word which you shall speak."

Jason wondered why Cheiron asked this of him; but he knew that the
Centaur was a prophet, and saw things long before they came. So he
promised, and leapt down the mountain, to take his fortune like a man.

He went down through the arbutus thickets, and across the downs of
thyme, till he came to the vineyard walls, and the pomegranates and the
olives in the glen; and among the olives roared Anauros, all foaming
with a summer flood.

And on the bank of Anauros sat a woman, all wrinkled gray, and old; her
head shook palsied on her breast, and her hands shook palsied on her
knees; and when she saw Jason, she spoke whining: "Who will carry me
across the flood?"

Jason was bold and hasty, and was just going to leap into the flood; and
yet he thought twice before he leapt, so loud roared the torrent down,
all brown from the mountain rains, and silver veined with melting snow;
while underneath he could hear the boulders rumbling like the tramp of
horsemen or the roll of wheels, as they ground along the narrow channel,
and shook the rocks on which he stood.

But the old woman whined all the more: "I am weak and old, fair youth.
For Hera's sake, carry me over the torrent."

And Jason was going to answer her scornfully, when Cheiron's words came
to his mind.

So he said: "For Hera's sake, the Queen of the Immortals on Olympus, I
will carry you over the torrent, unless we both are drowned midway."

Then the old dame leapt upon his back, as nimbly as a goat; and Jason
staggered in, wondering; and the first step was up to his knees.

The first step was up to his knees, and the second step was up to his
waist; and the stones rolled about his feet, and his feet slipped about
the stones; so he went on staggering and panting, while the old woman
cried from off his back:

"Fool, you have wet my mantle! Do you make game of poor old souls like
me?"

Jason had half a mind to drop her, and let her get through the torrent
by herself; but Cheiron's words were in his mind, and he said only:
"Patience, mother; the best horse may stumble some day."

At last he staggered to the shore, and set her down upon the bank; and a
strong man he needed to have been, or that wild water he never would
have crossed.

He lay panting awhile upon the bank, and then leapt up to go upon his
journey; but he cast one look at the old woman, for he thought, "She
should thank me once at least."

And as he looked, she grew fairer than all women, and taller than all
men on earth; and her garments shone like the summer sea, and her jewels
like the stars of heaven; and over her forehead was a veil, woven of the
golden clouds of sunset; and through the veil she looked down on him,
with great soft heifer's eyes; with great eyes, mild and awful, which
filled all the glen with light.

And Jason fell upon his knees, and hid his face between his hands.

And she spoke: "I am the Queen of Olympus, Hera the wife of Zeus. As
thou hast done to me, so will I do to thee. Call on me in the hour of
need, and try if the Immortals can forget."

And when Jason looked up, she rose from off the earth, like a pillar of
tall white cloud, and floated away across the mountain peaks, toward
Olympus the holy hill.

Then a great fear fell on Jason; but after a while he grew light of
heart; and he blessed old Cheiron, and said: "Surely the Centaur is a
prophet, and guessed what would come to pass, when he bade me speak
harshly to no soul whom I might meet."

Then he went down toward Iolcos, and as he walked, he found that he had
lost one of his sandals in the flood.

And as he went through the streets, the people came out to look at him,
so tall and fair was he; but some of the elders whispered together; and
at last one of them stopped Jason, and called to him: "Fair lad, who are
you, and whence come you; and what is your errand in the town?"

"My name, good father, is Jason, and I come from Pelion up above; and my
errand is to Pelias your king; tell me then where his palace is."

But the old man started, and grew pale, and said, "Do you not know the
oracle, my son, that you go so boldly through the town, with but one
sandal on?"

"I am a stranger here, and know of no oracle; but what of my one sandal?
I lost the other in Anauros, while I was struggling with the flood."

Then the old man looked back to his companions; and one sighed and
another smiled; at last he said: "I will tell you, lest you rush upon
your ruin unawares. The oracle in Delphi has said, that a man wearing
one sandal should take the kingdom from Pelias, and keep it for
himself. Therefore beware how you go up to his palace, for he is the
fiercest and most cunning of all kings."

Then Jason laughed a great laugh, like a war horse in his pride: "Good
news, good father, both for you and me. For that very end I came into
the town."

Then he strode on toward the palace of Pelias, while all the people
wondered at his bearing.

And he stood in the doorway and cried, "Come out, come out, Pelias the
valiant, and fight for your kingdom like a man."

Pelias came out wondering, and "Who are you, bold youth?" he cried.

"I am Jason, the son of Æson, the heir of all this land."

Then Pelias lifted up his hands and eyes, and wept, or seemed to weep;
and blessed the heavens which had brought his nephew to him, never to
leave him more. "For," said he, "I have but three daughters, and no son
to be my heir. You shall be my heir then, and rule the kingdom after me,
and marry whichsoever of my daughters you shall choose; though a sad
kingdom you will find it, and whosoever rules it a miserable man. But
come in, come in, and feast."

So he drew Jason in, whether he would or not, and spoke to him so
lovingly and feasted him so well, that Jason's anger passed; and after
supper his three cousins came into the hall, and Jason thought that he
should like well enough to have one of them for his wife.

But at last he said to Pelias, "Why do you look so sad, my uncle? And
what did you mean just now, when you said that this was a doleful
kingdom, and its ruler a miserable man?"

Then Pelias sighed heavily again and again and again, like a man who
had to tell some dreadful story and was afraid to begin; but at last:

"For seven long years and more have I never known a quiet night; and no
more will he who comes after me, till the golden fleece be brought
home."

Then he told Jason the story of Phrixus, and of the golden fleece; and
told him, too, which was a lie, that Phrixus's spirit tormented him,
calling to him day and night. And his daughters came, and told the same
tale (for their father had taught them their parts) and wept, and said,
"Oh, who will bring home the golden fleece, that our uncle's spirit may
have rest; and that we may have rest also, whom he never lets sleep in
peace?"

Jason sat awhile, sad and silent; for he had often heard of that golden
fleece; but he looked on it as a thing hopeless and impossible for any
mortal man to win it.

But when Pelias saw him silent, he began to talk of other things, and
courted Jason more and more, speaking to him as if he was certain to be
his heir, and asking his advice about the kingdom; till Jason who was
young and simple, could not help saying to himself, "Surely he is not
the dark man whom people call him. Yet why did he drive my father out?"
And he asked Pelias boldly, "Men say that you are terrible, and a man of
blood; but I find you a kind and hospitable man; and as you are to me,
so will I be to you. Yet why did you drive my father out?"

Pelias smiled and sighed: "Men have slandered me in that, as in all
things. Your father was growing old and weary, and he gave the kingdom
up to me of his own will. You shall see him to-morrow, and ask him; and
he will tell you the same."

Jason's heart leapt in him, when he heard that he was to see his
father; and he believed all that Pelias said, forgetting that his father
might not dare to tell the truth.

"One thing more there is," said Pelias, "on which I need your advice;
for though you are young, I see in you a wisdom beyond your years. There
is one neighbour of mine, whom I dread more than all men on earth. I am
stronger than he now, and can command him; but I know that if he stay
among us, he will work my ruin in the end. Can you give me a plan,
Jason, by which I can rid myself of that man?"

After awhile, Jason answered, half laughing, "Were I you, I would send
him to fetch that same golden fleece; for if he once set forth after it
you would never be troubled with him more."

And at that a bitter smile came across Pelias's lips, and a flash of
wicked joy into his eyes; and Jason saw it, and started; and over his
mind came the warning of the old man, and his own one sandal, and the
oracle, and he saw that he was taken in a trap.

But Pelias only answered gently, "My son, he shall be sent forthwith."

"You mean me?" cried Jason, starting up, "because I came here with one
sandal?" And he lifted his fist angrily, while Pelias stood up to him
like a wolf at bay; and whether of the two was the stronger and the
fiercer, it would be hard to tell.

But after a moment Pelias spoke gently, "Why then so rash, my son? You,
and not I, have said what is said; why blame me for what I have not
done? Had you bid me love the man of whom I spoke, and make him my
son-in-law and heir, I would have obeyed you; and what if I obey you
now, and send the man to win himself immortal fame? I have not harmed
you, or him. One thing at least I know, that he will go, and that
gladly; for he has a hero's heart within him; loving glory, and scorning
to break the word which he has given."

Jason saw that he was entrapped; but his second promise to Cheiron came
into his mind, and he thought, "What if the Centaur were a prophet in
that also, and meant that I should win the fleece!" Then he cried aloud:

"You have well spoken, cunning uncle of mine! I love glory, and I dare
keep to my word. I will go and fetch this golden fleece. Promise me but
this in return, and keep your word as I keep mine. Treat my father
lovingly while I am gone, for the sake of the all-seeing Zeus; and give
me up the kingdom for my own, on the day that I bring back the golden
fleece."

Then Pelias looked at him and almost loved him, in the midst of all his
hate; and said, "I promise, and I will perform. It will be no shame to
give up my kingdom to the man who wins that fleece."

Then they swore a great oath between them; and afterward both went in,
and lay down to sleep.

But Jason could not sleep, for thinking of his mighty oath, and how he
was to fulfil it, all alone, and without wealth or friends. So he tossed
a long time upon his bed, and thought of this plan and of that; and
sometimes Phrixus seemed to call him, in a thin voice, faint and low, as
if it came from far across the sea, "Let me come home to my fathers and
have rest." And sometimes he seemed to see the eyes of Hera, and to hear
her words again, "Call on me in the hour of need, and see if the
Immortals can forget."

And on the morrow he went to Pelias, and said, "Give me a victim, that I
may sacrifice to Hera." So he went up, and offered his sacrifice; and
as he stood by the altar, Hera sent a thought into his mind; and he went
back to Pelias, and said:

"If you are indeed in earnest, give me two heralds, that they may go
round to all the princes of the Minuai who were pupils of the Centaur
with me, that we may fit out a ship together, and take what shall
befall."

At that Pelias praised his wisdom, and hastened to send the heralds out;
for he said in his heart: "Let all the princes go with him, and like
him, never return; for so I shall be lord of all the Minuai, and the
greatest king in Hellas."


PART III

_How They Built the Ship Argo in Iolcos_

So the heralds went out, and cried to all the heroes of the Minuai, "Who
dare come to the adventure of the golden fleece?"

And Hera stirred the hearts of all the princes, and they came from all
their valleys to the yellow sands of Pagasai. And first came Heracles
the mighty, with his lion's skin and club, and behind him Hylas his
young squire, who bore his arrows and his bow; and Tiphys, the skilful
steersman; and Butes, the fairest of all men; and Castor and Polydeuces
the twins, the sons of the magic swan; and Caineus, the strongest of
mortals, whom the Centaurs tried in vain to kill, and overwhelmed him
with trunks of pine trees, but even so he would not die; and thither
came Zetes and Calais, the winged sons of the north wind; and Peleus,
the father of Achilles, whose bride was silver-footed Thetis the goddess
of the sea. And thither came Telamon and Oileus, the fathers of the two
Aiantes, who fought upon the plains of Troy; and Mopsus, the wise
soothsayer, who knew the speech of birds; and Idmon, to whom Phœbus
gave a tongue to prophesy of things to come; and Ancaios, who could read
the stars, and knew all the circles of the heavens; and Argus, the famed
shipbuilder, and many a hero more, in helmets of brass and gold with
tall dyed horsehair crests, and embroidered shirts of linen beneath
their coats of mail, and greaves of polished tin to guard their knees in
fight; with each man his shield upon his shoulder, of many a fold of
tough bull's hide, and his sword of tempered bronze in his
silver-studded belt, and in his right hand a pair of lances, of the
heavy white-ash stave.

So they came down to Iolcos, and all the city came out to meet them, and
were never tired with looking at their height, and their beauty, and
their gallant bearing, and the glitter of their inlaid arms. And some
said, "Never was such a gathering of the heroes since the Hellenes
conquered the land." But the women sighed over them, and whispered,
"Alas! they are all going to the death."

Then they felled the pines on Pelion, and shaped them with the axe, and
Argus taught them to build a galley, the first long ship which ever
sailed the seas. They pierced her for fifty oars, an oar for each hero
of the crew, and pitched her with coal-black pitch, and painted her bows
with vermilion; and they named her Argo after Argus, and worked at her
all day long. And at night Pelias feasted them like a king, and they
slept in his palace porch.

But Jason went away to the northward, and into the land of Thrace, till
he found Orpheus, the prince of minstrels, where he dwelt in his cave
under Rhodope, among the savage Cicon tribes. And he asked him: "Will
you leave your mountains, Orpheus, my fellow scholar in old times, and
cross Strymon once more with me, to sail with the heroes of the Minuai,
and bring home the golden fleece, and charm for us all men and all
monsters with your magic harp and song?"

Then Orpheus sighed: "Have I not had enough of toil and of weary
wandering far and wide, since I lived in Cheiron's cave, above Iolcos by
the sea? In vain is the skill and the voice which my goddess mother gave
me; in vain have I sung and laboured; in vain I went down to the dead,
and charmed all the kings of Hades, to win back Eurydice my bride. For I
won her, my beloved, and lost her again the same day, and wandered away
in my madness, even to Egypt and the Libyan sands, and the isles of all
the seas, driven on by the terrible gadfly, while I charmed in vain the
hearts of men, and the savage forest beasts, and the trees, and the
lifeless stones, with my magic harp and song, giving rest, but finding
none. But at last Calliope, my mother, delivered me, and brought me home
in peace; and I dwell here in the cave alone, among the savage Cicon
tribes, softening their wild hearts with music and the gentle laws of
Zeus. And now I must go out again, to the ends of all the earth, far
away into the misty darkness, to the last wave of the Eastern Sea. But
what is doomed must be, and a friend's demand obeyed; for prayers are
the daughters of Zeus, and who honours them honours him."

Then Orpheus rose up sighing, and took his harp, and went over Strymon.
And he led Jason to the southwest, up the banks of Haliacmon and over
the spurs of Pindus, to Dodona the town of Zeus, where it stood by the
side of the sacred lake, and the fountain which breathed out fire, in
the darkness of the ancient oak wood, beneath the mountain of the
hundred springs. And he led him to the holy oak, where the black dove
settled in old times, and was changed into the priestess of Zeus, and
gave oracles to all nations round. And he bade him cut down a bough, and
sacrifice to Hera and to Zeus; and they took the bough and came to
Iolcos, and nailed it to the beak head of the ship.

And at last the ship was finished, and they tried to launch her down the
beach; but she was too heavy for them to move her, and her keel sank
deep in the sand. Then all the heroes looked at each other blushing; but
Jason spoke, and said, "Let us ask the magic bough; perhaps it can help
us in our need."

Then a voice came from the bough, and Jason heard the words it said, and
bade Orpheus play upon the harp, while the heroes waited round, holding
the pine-trunk rollers, to help her toward the sea.

Then Orpheus took his harp, and began his magic song: "How sweet it is
to ride upon the surges, and to leap from wave to wave, while the wind
sings cheerful in the cordage, and the oars flash fast among the foam!
How sweet it is to roam across the ocean, and see new towns and wondrous
lands, and to come home laden with treasure, and to win undying fame!"

And the good ship Argo heard him, and longed to be away and out at sea;
till she stirred in every timber, and heaved from stem to stern, and
leapt up from the sand upon the rollers, and plunged onward like a
gallant horse; and the heroes fed her path with pine trunks, till she
rushed into the whispering sea.

Then they stored her well with food and water, and pulled the ladder up
on board, and settled themselves each man to his oar, and kept time to
Orpheus's harp; and away across the bay they rowed southward, while the
people lined the cliffs; and the women wept while the men shouted, at
the starting of that gallant crew.


PART IV

_How the Argonauts Sailed to Colchis_

And what happened next, my children, whether it be true or not, stands
written in ancient songs, which you shall read for yourselves some day.
And grand old songs they are, written in grand old rolling verse; and
they call them the Songs of Orpheus, or the Orphics, to this day. And
they tell how the heroes came to Aphetai, across the bay, and waited for
the southwest wind, and chose themselves a captain from their crew: and
how all called for Heracles, because he was the strongest and most huge;
but Heracles refused, and called for Jason, because he was the wisest of
them all. So Jason was chosen captain: and Orpheus heaped a pile of wood
and slew a bull, and offered it to Hera, and called all the heroes to
stand round, each man's head crowned with olive, and to strike their
swords into the bull. Then he filled a golden goblet with the bull's
blood, and with wheaten flour, and honey, and wine, and the bitter salt
sea water, and bade the heroes taste. So each tasted the goblet, and
passed it round, and vowed an awful vow; and they vowed before the sun,
and the night, and the blue-haired sea who shakes the land, to stand by
Jason faithfully, in the adventure of the golden fleece; and whosoever
shrank back, or disobeyed, or turned traitor to his vow, then justice
should witness against him, and the Erinnes who track guilty men.

Then Jason lighted the pile, and burnt the carcass of the bull; and they
went to their ship and sailed eastward, like men who have a work to do;
and the place from which they went was called Aphetai, the sailing
place, from that day forth. Three thousand years ago and more they
sailed away, into the unknown Eastern seas; and great nations have come
and gone since then, and many a storm has swept the earth; and many a
mighty armament, to which Argo would be but one small boat, have sailed
those waters since; yet the fame of that small Argo lives forever, and
her name is become a proverb among men.

So they sailed past the Isle of Sciathos, with the Cape of Sepius on
their left, and turned to the northward toward Pelion, up the long
Magnesian shore. On their right hand was the open sea, and on their left
old Pelion rose, while the clouds crawled round his dark pine forests,
and his caps of summer snow. And their hearts yearned for the dear old
mountain, as they thought of pleasant days gone by, and of the sports of
their boyhood, and their hunting, and their schooling in the cave
beneath the cliff. And at last Peleus spoke: "Let us land here, friends,
and climb the dear old hill once more. We are going on a fearful
journey: who knows if we shall see Pelion again? Let us go up to Cheiron
our master, and ask his blessing ere we start. And I have a boy, too,
with him, whom he trains as he trained me once, the son whom Thetis
brought me, the silver-footed lady of the sea, whom I caught in the
cave, and tamed her though she changed her shape seven times. For she
changed, as I held her, into water, and to vapour, and to burning flame,
and to a rock, and to a black-maned lion, and to a tall and stately
tree. But I held her and held her ever till she took her own shape
again, and led her to my father's house, and won her for my bride. And
all the rulers of Olympus came to our wedding, and the heavens and the
earth rejoiced together, when an immortal wedded mortal man. And now let
me see my son; for it is not often I shall see him upon earth; famous he
will be, but short lived, and die in the flower of youth."

So Tiphys, the helmsman, steered them to the shore under the crags of
Pelion; and they went up through the dark pine forests toward the
Centaur's cave.

And they came into the misty hall, beneath the snow-crowned crag; and
saw the great Centaur lying with his huge limbs spread upon the rock;
and beside him stood Achilles, the child whom no steel could wound, and
played upon his harp right sweetly, while Cheiron watched and smiled.

Then Cheiron leapt up and welcomed them, and kissed them every one, and
set a feast before them, of swine's flesh, and venison, and good wine;
and young Achilles served them, and carried the golden goblet round. And
after supper all the heroes clapped their hands, and called on Orpheus
to sing; but he refused, and said, "How can I, who am the younger, sing
before our ancient host?" So they called on Cheiron to sing, and
Achilles brought him his harp; and he began a wondrous song; a famous
story of old time, of the fight between Centaurs and the Lapithai, which
you may still see carved in stone. He sang how his brothers came to ruin
by their folly, when they were mad with wine; and how they and the
heroes fought, with fists, and teeth, and the goblets from which they
drank; and how they tore up the pine trees in their fury, and hurled
great crags of stone, while the mountains thundered with the battle, and
the land was wasted far and wide; till the Lapithai drove them from
their home in the rich Thessalian plains to the lonely glens of Pindus,
leaving Cheiron all alone. And the heroes praised his song right
heartily; for some of them had helped in that great fight.

Then Orpheus took the lyre, and sang of Chaos, and the making of the
wondrous World, and how all things sprang from Love, who could not live
alone in the Abyss. And as he sang, his voice rose from the cave, above
the crags, and through the tree tops, and the glens of oak and pine. And
the trees bowed their heads when they heard it, and the gray rocks
cracked and rang, and the forest beasts crept near to listen, and the
birds forsook their nests and hovered round. And old Cheiron clapt his
hands together, and beat his hoofs upon the ground, for wonder at that
magic song.

Then Peleus kissed his boy, and wept over him, and they went down to the
ship; and Cheiron came down with them, weeping, and kissed them one by
one, and blest them, and promised to them great renown. And the heroes
wept when they left him, till their great hearts could weep no more; for
he was kind and just and pious, and wiser than all beasts and men. Then
he went up to a cliff, and prayed for them, that they might come home
safe and well; while the heroes rowed away, and watched him standing on
his cliff above the sea, with his great hands raised toward heaven, and
his white locks waving in the wind; and they strained their eyes to
watch him to the last, for they felt that they should look on him no
more.

So they rowed on over the long swell of the sea, past Olympus, the seat
of die immortals, and past the wooded bays of Athos, and Samothrace, the
sacred isle; and they came past Lemnos to the Hellespont, and through
the narrow strait of Abydos, and so on into the Propontis, which we call
Marmora now. And there they met with Cyzicus, ruling in Asia over the
Dolions, who, the songs say, was the son of Æneas, of whom you will hear
many a tale some day. For Homer tells us how he fought at Troy; and
Virgil how he sailed away and founded Rome; and men believed until late
years that from him sprang the old British kings. Now Cyzicus, the songs
say, welcomed the heroes; for his father had been one of Cheiron's
scholars; so he welcomed them, and feasted them, and stored their ship
with corn and wine, and cloaks and rugs, the songs say, and shirts, of
which no doubt they stood in need.

But at night, while they lay sleeping, came down on them terrible men,
who lived with the bears in the mountains, like Titans or giants in
shape; for each of them had six arms, and they fought with young firs
and pines. But Heracles killed them all before morn with his deadly
poisoned arrows; but among them, in the darkness, he slew Cyzicus the
kindly prince.

Then they got to their ship and to their oars, and Tiphys bade them cast
off the hawsers, and go to sea. But as he spoke a whirlwind came, and
spun the Argo round, and twisted the hawsers together, so that no man
could loose them. Then Tiphys dropped the rudder from his hand, and
cried, "This comes from the Gods above." But Jason went forward, and
asked counsel of the magic bough.

Then the magic bough spoke and answered: "This is because you have
slain Cyzicus your friend. You must appease his soul, or you will never
leave this shore."

Jason went back sadly, and told the heroes what he had heard. And they
leapt on shore, and searched till dawn; and at dawn they found the body,
all rolled in dust and blood, among the corpses of those monstrous
beasts. And they wept over their kind host, and laid him on a fair bed,
and heaped a huge mound over him, and offered black sheep at his tomb,
and Orpheus sang a magic song to him, that his spirit might have rest.
And then they held games at the tomb, after the custom of those times,
and Jason gave prizes to each winner. To Ancæus he gave a golden cup,
for he wrestled best of all; and to Heracles a silver one, for he was
the strongest of all; and to Castor, who rode best, a golden crest; and
Polydeuces the boxer had a rich carpet, and to Orpheus for his song, a
sandal with golden wings. But Jason himself was the best of all the
archers, and the Minuai crowned him with an olive crown; and so, the
songs say, the soul of good Cyzicus was appeased, and the heroes went on
their way in peace.

But when Cyzicus's wife heard that he was dead, she died likewise of
grief; and her tears became a fountain of clear water, which flows the
whole year round.

Then they rowed away, the songs say, along the Mysian shore, and past
the mouth of Rhindacus, till they found a pleasant bay, sheltered by the
long ridges of Arganthus, and by high walls of basalt rock. And there
they ran the ship ashore upon the yellow sand, and furled the sail, and
took the mast down, and lashed it in its crutch. And next they let down
the ladder, and went ashore to sport and rest.

And there Heracles went away into the woods, bow in hand, to hunt wild
deer; and Hylas the fair boy slipt away after him, and followed him by
stealth, until he lost himself among the glens, and sat down weary to
rest himself by the side of a lake; and there the water nymphs came up
to look at him, and loved him, and carried him down under the lake to be
their playfellow, forever happy and young. And Heracles sought for him
in vain, shouting his name till all the mountains rang; but Hylas never
heard him, far down under the sparkling lake. So while Heracles wandered
searching for him, a fair breeze sprang up, and Heracles was nowhere to
be found; and the Argo sailed away, and Heracles was left behind, and
never saw the noble Phasian stream.

Then the Minuai came to a doleful land, where Amycus the giant ruled,
and cared nothing for the laws of Zeus, but challenged all strangers to
box with him, and those whom he conquered he slew. But Polydeuces the
boxer struck him a harder blow than he ever felt before, and slew him;
and the Minuai went on up the Bosphorus, till they came to the city of
Phineus, the fierce Bithynian king; for Zetes and Calais bade Jason land
there, because they had a work to do.

And they went up from the shore toward the city, through forests white
with snow; and Phineus came out to meet them with a lean and woeful
face, and said, "Welcome, gallant heroes, to the land of bitter blasts,
a land of cold and misery; yet I will feast you as best I can." And he
led them in, and set meat before them; but before they could put their
hands to their mouths, down came two fearful monsters, the like of whom
man never saw; for they had the faces and the hair of fair maidens, but
the wings and claws of hawks; and they snatched the meat from off the
table, and flew shrieking out above the roofs.

Then Phineus beat his breast and cried, "These are the Harpies, whose
names are the Whirlwind and the Swift, the daughters of Wonder and of
the Amber nymph, and they rob us night and day. They carried off the
daughters of Pandareus, whom all the Gods had blest; for Aphrodite fed
them on Olympus with honey and milk and wine; and Hera gave them beauty
and wisdom, and Athene skill in all the arts; but when they came to
their wedding, the Harpies snatched them both away, and gave them to be
slaves to the Erinnues, and live in horror all their days. And now they
haunt me, and my people, and the Bosphorus, with fearful storms; and
sweep away our food from off our tables, so that we starve in spite of
all our wealth."

Then up rose Zetes and Calais, the winged sons of the North wind, and
said, "Do you not know us, Phineus, and these wings which grow upon our
backs?" And Phineus hid his face in terror; but he answered not a word.

"Because you have been a traitor, Phineus, the Harpies haunt you night
and day. Where is Cleopatra our sister, your wife, whom you keep in
prison? and where are her two children, whom you blinded in your rage,
at the bidding of an evil woman, and cast them out upon the rocks? Swear
to us that you will right our sister, and cast out that wicked woman;
and then we will free you from your plague, and drive the whirlwind
maidens from the south; but if not, we will put out your eyes, as you
put out the eyes of your own sons."

Then Phineus swore an oath to them, and drove out the wicked woman; and
Jason took those two poor children, and cured their eyes with magic
herbs.

But Zetes and Calais rose up sadly; and said: "Farewell now, heroes
all; farewell, our dear companions, with whom we played on Pelion in old
times; for a fate is laid upon us, and our day is come at last, in which
we may hunt the whirlwinds, over land and sea forever; and if we catch
them they die, and if not, we die ourselves."

At that all the heroes wept; but the two young men sprang up, and aloft
into the air after the Harpies, and the battle of the winds began.

The heroes trembled in silence as they heard the shrieking of the
blasts; while the palace rocked and all the city, and great stones were
torn from the crags, and the forest pines were hurled eastward, north
and south and east and west, and the Bosphorus boiled white with foam,
and the clouds were dashed against the cliffs.

But at last the battle ended, and the Harpies fled screaming toward the
south, and the sons of the North wind rushed after them, and brought
clear sunshine where they passed. For many a league they followed them,
over all the isles of the Cyclades, and away to the southwest across
Hellas, till they came to the Ionian Sea, and there they fell upon the
Echinades, at the mouth of the Achelous; and those isles were called the
Whirlwind Isles for many a hundred years. But what became of Zetes and
Calais I know not; for the heroes never saw them again; and some say
that Heracles met them, and quarrelled with them, and slew them with his
arrows; and some say that they fell down from weariness and the heat of
the summer sun, and that the Sun god buried them among the Cyclades, in
the pleasant Isle of Tenos; and for many hundred years their grave was
shown there, and over it a pillar, which turned to every wind. But those
dark storms and whirlwinds haunt the Bosphorus until this day.

But the Argonauts went eastward, and out into the open sea, which we now
call the Black Sea, but it was called the Euxine then. No Hellen had
ever crossed it, and all feared that dreadful sea, and its rocks, and
shoals, and fogs, and bitter freezing storms; and they told strange
stories of it, some false and some half true, how it stretched northward
to the ends of the earth, and the sluggish Putrid Sea, and the
everlasting night, and the regions of the dead. So the heroes trembled,
for all their courage, as they came into that wild Black Sea, and saw it
stretching out before them, without a shore, as far as eye could see.

And first Orpheus spoke, and warned them: "We shall come now to the
wandering blue rocks; my mother warned me of them, Calliope, the
immortal muse."

And soon they saw the blue rocks shining, like spires and castles of
gray glass, while an ice-cold wind blew from them, and chilled all the
heroes' hearts. And as they neared, they could see them heaving, as they
rolled upon the long sea waves, crashing and grinding together, till the
roar went up to heaven. The sea sprang up in spouts between them, and
swept round them in white sheets of foam; but their heads swung nodding
high in air, while the wind whistled shrill among the crags.

The heroes' hearts sank within them, and they lay upon their oars in
fear; but Orpheus called to Tiphys the helmsman: "Between them we must
pass; so look ahead for an opening, and be brave, for Hera is with us."
But Tiphys the cunning helmsman stood silent, clenching his teeth, till
he saw a heron come flying mast high toward the rocks, and hover awhile
before them, as if looking for a passage through. Then he cried, "Hera
has sent us a pilot; let us follow the cunning bird."

Then the heron flapped to and fro a moment, till he saw a hidden gap,
and into it he rushed like an arrow, while the heroes watched what would
befall.

And the blue rocks clashed together as the bird fled swiftly through;
but they struck but a feather from his tail, and then rebounded apart at
the shock.

Then Tiphys cheered the heroes, and they shouted; and the oars bent like
withes beneath their strokes, as they rushed between those toppling ice
crags, and the cold blue lips of death. And ere the rocks could meet
again they had passed them, and were safe out in the open sea.

And after that they sailed on wearily along the Asian coast, by the
Black Cape and Thyneis, where the hot stream of Thymbris falls into the
sea, and Sangarius, whose waters float on the Euxine, till they came to
Wolf the river, and to Wolf the kindly king. And there died two brave
heroes, Idmon and Tiphys the wise helmsman; one died of an evil
sickness, and one a wild boar slew. So the heroes heaped a mound above
them, and set upon it an oar on high, and left them there to sleep
together, on the far-off Lycian shore. But Idas killed the boar, and
avenged Tiphys; and Ancaios took the rudder and was helmsman, and
steered them on toward the east.

And they went on past Sinope, and many a mighty river's mouth, and past
many a barbarous tribe, and the cities of the Amazons, the warlike women
of the East, till all night they heard the clank of anvils and the roar
of furnace blasts, and the forge fires shone like sparks through the
darkness, in the mountain glens aloft; for they were come to the shores
of the Chalybes, the smiths who never tire, but serve Ares the cruel War
god, forging weapons day and night.

And at day dawn they looked eastward, and midway between the sea and the
sky they saw white snow peaks hanging glittering sharp and bright above
the clouds. And they knew that they were come to Caucasus, at the end of
all the earth; Caucasus the highest of all mountains, the father of the
rivers of the East. On his peak lies chained the Titan, while a vulture
tears his heart; and at his feet are piled dark forests round the magic
Colchian land.

And they rowed three days to the eastward, while Caucasus rose higher
hour by hour, till they saw the dark stream of Phasis rushing headlong
to the sea, and shining above the treetops, the golden roofs of King
Aietes, the child of the sun.

Then out spoke Ancaios the helmsman: "We are come to our goal at last;
for there are the roofs of Aietes, and the woods where all poisons grow;
but who can tell us where among them is hid the golden fleece? Many a
toil must we bear ere we find it, and bring it home to Greece."

But Jason cheered the heroes, for his heart was high and bold; and he
said: "I will go alone up to Aietes, though he be the child of the sun,
and win him with soft words. Better so than to go altogether, and to
come to blows at once." But the Minuai would not stay behind, so they
rowed boldly up the stream.

And a dream came to Aietes, and filled his heart with fear. He thought
he saw a shining star, which fell into his daughter's lap; and that
Medeia his daughter took it gladly, and carried it to the river side,
and cast it in, and there the whirling river bore it down, and out into
the Euxine Sea.

Then he leapt up in fear, and bade his servants bring his chariot, that
he might go down to the riverside and appease the nymphs, and the heroes
whose spirits haunt the bank. So he went down in his golden chariot, and
his daughters by his side, Medeia the fair witch maiden, and Chalciope,
who had been Phrixus's wife, and behind him a crowd of servants and
soldiers, for he was a rich and mighty prince.

And as he drove down by the reedy river, he saw Argo sliding up beneath
the bank, and many a hero in her, like immortals for beauty and for
strength, as their weapons glittered round them in the level morning
sunlight, through the white mist of the stream. But Jason was the
noblest of all; for Hera who loved him gave him beauty, and tallness,
and terrible manhood.

And when they came near together and looked into each other's eyes, the
heroes were awed before Aietes as he shone in his chariot, like his
father the glorious Sun; for his robes were of rich gold tissue, and the
rays of his diadem flashed fire; and in his hand he bore a jewelled
sceptre, which glittered like the stars; and sternly he looked at them
under his brows, and sternly he spoke and loud:

"Who are you, and what want you here, that you come to the shore of
Cutaia? Do you take no account of my rule, nor of my people the
Colchians who serve me, who never tired yet in the battle, and know well
how to face an invader?"

And the heroes sat silent awhile before the face of that ancient king.
But Hera the awful goddess put courage into Jason's heart, and he rose
and shouted loudly in answer: "We are no pirates, nor lawless men. We
come not to plunder and to ravage, or carry away slaves from your land;
but my uncle, the son of Poseidon, Pelias the Minuan king, he it is who
has set me on a quest to bring home the golden fleece. And these, too,
my bold comrades, they are no nameless men; for some are the sons of
immortals, and some of heroes far renowned. And we, too, never tire in
battle, and know well how to give blows and to take; yet we wish to be
guests at your table; it will be better so for both."

Then Aietes's rage rushed up like a whirlwind, and his eyes flashed fire
as he heard; but he crushed his anger down in his breast, and spoke
mildly a cunning speech:

"If you will fight for the fleece with my Colchians, then many a man
must die. But do you indeed expect to win from me the fleece in fight?
So few you are, that if you be worsted, I can load your ship with your
corpses. But if you will be ruled by me, you will find it better far to
choose the best man among you, and let him fulfil the labours which I
demand. Then I will give him the golden fleece for a prize and a glory
to you all."

So saying, he turned his horses and drove back in silence to the town.
And the Minuai sat silent with sorrow, and longed for Heracles and his
strength; for there was no facing the thousands of the Colchians, and
the fearful chance of war.

But Chalciope, Phrixus's widow, went weeping to the town; for she
remembered her Minuan husband, and all the pleasures of her youth, while
she watched the fair faces of his kinsmen, and their long locks of
golden hair. And she whispered to Medeia her sister: "Why should all
these brave men die? why does not my father give them up the fleece,
that my husband's spirit may have rest?"

And Medeia's heart pitied the heroes, and Jason most of all; and she
answered, "Our father is stern and terrible, and who can win the golden
fleece?" But Chalciope said: "These men are not like our men; there is
nothing which they cannot dare nor do."

And Medeia thought of Jason and his brave countenance, and said: "If
there was one among them who knew no fear, I could show him how to win
the fleece."

So in the dusk of evening they went down to the riverside, Chalciope and
Medeia the witch maiden, and Argus, Phrixus's son. And Argus the boy
crept forward, among the beds of reeds, till he came where the heroes
were sleeping, on the thwarts of the ship, beneath the bank, while Jason
kept ward on shore, and leant upon his lance full of thought. And the
boy came to Jason, and said:

"I am the son of Phrixus, your cousin; and Chalciope my mother waits for
you, to talk about the golden fleece."

Then Jason went boldly with the boy, and found the two princesses
standing; and when Chalciope saw him she wept, and took his hands, and
cried:

"O cousin of my beloved, go home before you die!"

"It would be base to go home now, fair princess, and to have sailed all
these seas in vain." Then both the princesses besought him: but Jason
said, "It is too late."

"But you know not," said Medeia, "what he must do who would win the
fleece. He must tame the two brazen-footed bulls, who breathe devouring
flame; and with them he must plough ere nightfall four acres in the
field of Ares; and he must sow them with serpents' teeth, of which each
tooth springs up into an armed man. Then he must fight with all those
warriors; and little will it profit him to conquer them; for the fleece
is guarded by a serpent, more huge than any mountain pine; and over his
body you must step, if you would reach the golden fleece."

Then Jason laughed bitterly. "Unjustly is that fleece kept here, and by
an unjust and lawless king; and unjustly shall I die in my youth, for I
will attempt it ere another sun be set."

Then Medeia trembled, and said: "No mortal man can reach that fleece,
unless I guide him through. For round it, beyond the river, is a wall
full nine ells high, with lofty towers and buttresses, and mighty gates
of threefold brass; and over the gates the wall is arched, with golden
battlements above. And over the gateway sits Brimo, the wild witch
huntress of the woods, brandishing a pine torch in her hands, while her
mad hounds howl around. No man dare meet her or look on her, but only I
her priestess, and she watches far and wide lest any stranger should
come near."

"No wall so high but it may be climbed at last, and no wood so thick but
it may be crawled through; no serpent so wary but he may be charmed, or
witch queen so fierce but spells may soothe her; and I may yet win the
golden fleece, if a wise maiden help bold men."

And he looked at Medeia cunningly, and held her with his glittering eye,
till she blushed and trembled, and said:

"Who can face the fire of the bulls' breath, and fight ten thousand
armed men?"

"He whom you help," said Jason, flattering her, "for your fame is spread
over all the earth. Are you not the queen of all enchantresses, wiser
even than your sister Circe, in her fairy island in the West?"

"Would that I were with my sister Circe in her fairy island in the West,
far away from sore temptation, and thoughts which tear the heart! But
if it must be so--for why should you die?--I have an ointment here; I
made it from the magic ice flower which sprang from Prometheus's wound,
above the clouds on Caucasus, in the dreary fields of snow. Anoint
yourself with that, and you shall have in you seven men's strength; and
anoint your shield with it, and neither fire nor sword can harm you. But
what you begin you must end before sunset, for its virtue lasts only one
day. And anoint your helmet with it before you sow the serpents' teeth;
and when the sons of earth spring up, cast your helmet among their
ranks, and the deadly crop of the War-god's field will mow itself, and
perish."

Then Jason fell on his knees before her, and thanked her and kissed her
hands; and she gave him the vase of ointment, and fled trembling through
the reeds. And Jason told his comrades what had happened, and showed
them the box of ointment; and all rejoiced but Idas and he grew mad with
envy.

And at sunrise Jason went and bathed, and anointed himself from head to
foot, and his shield, and his helmet, and his weapons, and bade his
comrades try the spell. So they tried to bend his lance, but it stood
like an iron bar; and Idas in spite hewed at it with his sword, but the
blade flew to splinters in his face. Then they hurled their lances at
his shield, but the spear points turned like lead; and Caineus tried to
throw him, but he never stirred a foot; and Polydeuces struck him with
his fist a blow which would have killed an ox; but Jason only smiled,
and the heroes danced about him with delight; and he leapt and ran, and
shouted, in the joy of that enormous strength, till the sun rose, and it
was time to go and to claim Aietes's promise.

So he sent up Telamon and Aithalides to tell Aietes that he was ready
for the fight; and they went up among the marble walls, and beneath the
roofs of gold, and stood in Aietes's hall, while he grew pale with rage.

"Fulfil your promise to us, child of the blazing sun. Give us the
serpents' teeth, and let loose the fiery bulls; for we have found a
champion among us who can win the golden fleece."

And Aietes bit his lips, for he fancied that they had fled away by
night; but he could not go back from his promise; so he gave them the
serpents' teeth.

Then he called for his chariot and his horses, and sent heralds through
all the town; and all the people went out with him to the dreadful
War-god's field.

And there Aietes sat upon his throne, with his warriors on each hand,
thousands and tens of thousands, clothed from head to foot in
steel-chain mail. And the people and the women crowded to every window,
and bank and wall; while the Minuai stood together, a mere handful in
the midst of that great host.

And Chalciope was there and Argus, trembling, and Medeia, wrapped
closely in her veil; but Aietes did not know that she was muttering
cunning spells between her lips.

Then Jason cried, "Fulfil your promise, and let your fiery bulls come
forth."

Then Aietes bade open the gates, and the magic bulls leapt out. Their
brazen hoofs rang upon the ground, and their nostrils sent out sheets of
flame, as they rushed with lowered heads upon Jason; but he never
flinched a step. The flame of their breath swept round him, but it
singed not a hair of his head; and the bulls stopped short and trembled,
when Medeia began her spell.

Then Jason sprang upon the nearest, and seized him by the horn; and up
and down they wrestled, till the bull fell grovelling on his knees; for
the heart of the brute died within him, and his mighty limbs were loosed
beneath the steadfast eye of that dark witch maiden, and the magic
whisper of her lips.

So both the bulls were tamed and yoked; and Jason bound them to the
plough, and goaded them onward with his lance, till he had ploughed the
sacred field.

And all the Minuai shouted; but Aietes bit his lips with rage; for the
half of Jason's work was over, and the sun was yet high in heaven.

Then he took the serpents' teeth and sowed them, and waited what would
befall. But Medeia looked at him and at his helmet, lest he should
forget the lesson she had taught.

And every furrow heaved and bubbled, and out of every clod rose a man.
Out of the earth they rose by thousands, each clad from head to foot in
steel, and drew their swords and rushed on Jason, where he stood in the
midst alone. Then the Minuai grew pale with fear for him; but Aietes
laughed a bitter laugh. "See! if I had not warriors enough already round
me, I could call them out of the bosom of the earth."

But Jason snatched off his helmet, and hurled it into the thickest of
the throng. And blind madness came upon them, suspicion, hate, and fear;
and one cried to his fellow, "Thou didst strike me!" and another, "Thou
art Jason; thou shalt die!" So fury seized those earth-born phantoms,
and each turned his hand against the rest; and they fought and were
never weary, till they all lay dead upon the ground. Then the magic
furrows opened, and the kind earth took them home into her breast; and
the grass grew up all green again above them, and Jason's work was done.

Then the Minuai rose and shouted, till Prometheus heard them from his
crag. And Jason cried: "Lead me to the fleece this moment, before the
sun goes down."

But Aietes thought: "He has conquered the bulls; and sown and reaped the
deadly crop. Who is this who is proof against all magic? He may kill the
serpent yet." So he delayed, and sat taking counsel with his princes,
till the sun went down and all was dark. Then he bade a herald cry,
"Every man to his home for to-night. To-morrow we will meet these
heroes, and speak about the golden fleece."

Then he turned and looked at Medeia: "This is your doing, false witch
maid! You have helped these yellow-haired strangers, and brought shame
upon your father and yourself!"

Medeia shrank and trembled, and her face grew pale with fear; and Aietes
knew that she was guilty, and whispered, "If they win the fleece, you
die!"

But the Minuai marched toward their ship, growling like lions cheated of
their prey; for they saw that Aietes meant to mock them, and to cheat
them out of all their toil. And Oileus said, "Let us go to the grove
together, and take the fleece by force."

And Idas the rash cried, "Let us draw lots who shall go in first; for
while the dragon is devouring one, the rest can slay him, and carry off
the fleece in peace." But Jason held them back, though he praised them;
for he hoped for Medeia's help.

And after awhile Medeia came trembling, and wept a long while before she
spoke. And at last:

"My end is come, and I must die; for my father has found out that I
have helped you. You he would kill if he dared; but he will not harm
you, because you have been his guests. Go then, go, and remember poor
Medeia when you are far away across the sea." But all the heroes cried:

"If you die, we die with you; for without you we cannot win the fleece,
and home we will not go without it, but fall here fighting to the last
man."

"You need not die," said Jason. "Flee home with us across the sea. Show
us first how to win the fleece; for you can do it. Why else are you the
priestess of the grove? Show us but how to win the fleece, and come with
us, and you shall be my queen, and rule over the rich princes of the
Minuai, in Iolcos by the sea."

And all the heroes pressed round, and vowed to her that she should be
their queen.

Medeia wept, and shuddered, and hid her face in her hands; for her heart
yearned after her sisters and her playfellows, and the home where she
was brought up as a child. But at last she looked up at Jason, and spoke
between her sobs:

"Must I leave my home and my people, to wander with strangers across the
sea? The lot is cast, and I must endure it. I will show you how to win
the golden fleece. Bring up your ship to the woodside, and moor her
there against the bank and let Jason come up at midnight, and one brave
comrade with him, and meet me beneath the wall."

Then all the heroes cried together: "I will go!" "and I!" "and I!" And
Idas the rash grew mad with envy; for he longed to be foremost in all
things. But Medeia calmed them, and said: "Orpheus shall go with Jason,
and bring his magic harp; for I hear of him that he is the king of all
minstrels, and can charm all things on earth."

And Orpheus laughed for joy, and clapped his hands, because the choice
had fallen on him; for in those days poets and singers were as bold
warriors as the best.

So at midnight they went up the bank, and found Medeia; and beside came
Absyrtus her young brother, leading a yearling lamb.

Then Medeia brought them to a thicket, beside the War-god's gate; and
there she bade Jason dig a ditch, and kill the lamb and leave it there,
and strew on it magic herbs and honey from the honeycomb.

Then sprang up through the earth, with the red fire flashing before her,
Brimo the wild witch huntress, while her mad hounds howled around. She
had one head like a horse's, and another like a ravening hound's, and
another like a hissing snake's, and a sword in either hand. And she
leapt into the ditch with her hounds, and they ate and drank their fill,
while Jason and Orpheus trembled, and Medeia hid her eyes. And at last
the witch queen vanished, and fled with her hounds into the woods; and
the bars of the gates fell down, and the brazen doors flew wide, and
Medeia and the heroes ran forward and hurried through the poison wood,
among the dark stems of the mighty beeches, guided by the gleam of the
golden fleece, until they saw it hanging on one vast tree in the midst.
And Jason would have sprung to seize it; but Medeia held him back, and
pointed shuddering to the tree foot, where the mighty serpent lay,
coiled in and out among the roots, with a body like a mountain pine. His
coils stretched many a fathom, spangled with bronze and gold; and half
of him they could see, but no more; for the rest lay in the darkness
far beyond.

And when he saw them coming, he lifted up his head, and watched them
with his small bright eyes, and flashed his forked tongue, and roared
like the fire among the woodlands, till the forest tossed and groaned.
For his cry shook the trees from leaf to root, and swept over the long
reaches of the river, and over Æetes's hall, and woke the sleepers in
the city, till mothers clasped their children in their fear.

But Medeia called gently to him; and he stretched out his long spotted
neck, and licked her hand, and looked up in her face, as if to ask for
food. Then she made a sign to Orpheus, and he began his magic song.

And as he sung, the forest grew calm again, and the leaves on every tree
hung still; and the serpent's head sank down, and his brazen coils grew
limp, and his glittering eyes closed lazily, till he breathed as gently
as a child, while Orpheus called to pleasant Slumber, who gives peace to
men, and beasts, and waves.

Then Jason leapt forward warily, and stept across that mighty snake, and
tore the fleece from off the tree trunk; and the four rushed down the
garden, to the bank where the Argo lay.

There was a silence for a moment, while Jason held the golden fleece on
high. Then he cried: "Go now, good Argo, swift and steady, if ever you
would see Pelion more."

And she went, as the heroes drove her, grim and silent all, with muffled
oars, till the pine wood bent like willow in their hands, and stout Argo
groaned beneath their strokes.

On and on, beneath the dewy darkness, they fled swiftly down the
swirling stream; underneath black walls, and temples, and the castles of
the princes of the East; past sluice mouths, and fragrant gardens, and
groves of all strange fruits; past marshes where fat kine lay sleeping,
and long beds of whispering reeds; till they heard the merry music of
the surge upon the bar, as it tumbled in the moonlight all alone.

Into the surge they rushed, and Argo leapt the breakers like a horse;
for she knew the time was come to show her mettle, and win honour for
the heroes and herself.

Into the surge they rushed, and Argo leapt the breakers like a horse,
till the heroes stopped all panting, each man upon his oar, as she slid
into the still broad sea.

Then Orpheus took his harp and sang a pæan, till the heroes' hearts rose
high again; and they rowed on stoutly and steadfastly, away into the
darkness of the West.


PART V

_How the Argonauts Were Driven into the Unknown Sea_

So they fled away in haste to the westward: but Aietes manned his fleet
and followed them. And Lynceus the quick eyed saw him coming, while he
was still many a mile away, and cried: "I see a hundred ships, like a
flock of white swans, far in the east." And at that they rowed hard,
like heroes; but the ships came nearer every hour.

Then Medeia, the dark witch maiden, laid a cruel and a cunning plot; for
she killed Absyrtus her young brother, and cast him into the sea, and
said: "Ere my father can take up his corpse and bury it, he must wait
long, and be left far behind."

And all the heroes shuddered, and looked one at the other for shame; yet
they did not punish that dark witch woman, because she had won for them
the golden fleece.

And when Aietes came to the place, he saw the floating corpse; and he
stopped a long while, and bewailed his son, and took him up, and went
home. But he sent on his sailors toward the westward, and bound them by
a mighty curse: "Bring back to me that dark witch woman, that she may
die a dreadful death. But if you return without her, you shall die by
the same death yourselves."

So the Argonauts escaped for that time; but Father Zeus saw that foul
crime; and out of the heavens he sent a storm, and swept the ship far
from her course. Day after day the storm drove her, amid foam and
blinding mist, till they knew no longer where they were, for the sun was
blotted from the skies. And at last the ship struck on a shoal, amid low
isles of mud and sand, and the waves rolled over her and through her,
and the heroes lost all hope of life.

Then Jason cried to Hera: "Fair queen, who hast befriended us till now,
why hast thou left us in our misery, to die here among unknown seas? It
is hard to lose the honour which we have won with such toil and danger,
and hard never to see Hellas again, and the pleasant bay of Pagasai."

Then out and spoke the magic bough which stood upon the Argo's beak:
"Because Father Zeus is angry, all this has fallen on you; for a cruel
crime has been done on board, and the sacred ship is foul with blood."

At that some of the heroes cried: "Medeia is the murderess. Let the
witch woman bear her sin, and die!"

And they seized Medeia, to hurl her into the sea and atone for the young
boy's death; but the magic bough spoke again: "Let her live till her
crimes are full. Vengeance waits for her, slow and sure; but she must
live, for you need her still. She must show you the way to her sister
Circe, who lives among the islands of the West. To her you must sail, a
weary way, and she shall cleanse you from your guilt."

Then all the heroes wept aloud when they heard the sentence of the oak;
for they knew that a dark journey lay before them, and years of bitter
toil. And some upbraided the dark witch woman, and some said: "Nay, we
are her debtors still; without her we should never have won the fleece."
But most of them bit their lips in silence, for they feared the witch's
spells.

And now the sea grew calmer, and the sun shone out once more, and the
heroes thrust the ship off the sand bank, and rowed forward on their
weary course, under the guiding of the dark witch maiden, into the
wastes of the unknown sea.

Whither they went I cannot tell, nor how they came to Circe's isle. Some
say that they went to the westward, and up the Ister[A] stream, and so
came into the Adriatic, dragging their ship over the snowy Alps. And
others say that they went southward, into the Red Indian Sea, and past
the sunny lands where spices grow, round Æthiopia toward the west; and
that at last they came to Libya, and dragged their ship across the
burning sands, and over the hills into the Syrtes, where the flats and
quicksands spread for many a mile, between rich Cyrene and the
Lotus-eaters' shore. But all these are but dreams and fables, and dim
hints of unknown lands.

[Footnote A: The Danube.]

But all say that they came to a place where they had to drag their ship
across the land nine days with ropes and rollers, till they came into an
unknown sea. And the best of all the old songs tells us, how they went
away toward the north, till they came to the slope of Caucasus, where it
sinks into the sea; and to the narrow Cimmerian Bosphorus,[A] where the
Titan swam across upon the bull; and thence into the lazy waters of the
still Mæotid Lake.[B] And thence they went northward ever, up the
Tanais, which we call Don, past the Geloni and Sauromatai, and many a
wandering shepherd tribe, and the one-eyed Arimaspi, of whom old Greek
poets tell, who steal the gold from the Griffins, in the cold
Rhiphaian[C] hills.

And they passed the Scythian archers, and the Tauri who eat men, and the
wandering Hyperboreai, who feed their flocks beneath the pole star,
until they came into the northern ocean, the dull dead Cronian Sea.[D]
And there Argo would move on no longer; and each man clasped his elbow,
and leaned his head upon his hand, heartbroken with toil and hunger, and
gave himself up to death. But brave Ancaios the helmsman cheered up
their hearts once more, and bade them leap on land, and haul the ship
with ropes and rollers for many a weary day, whether over land, or mud,
or ice, I know not, for the song is mixed and broken like a dream. And
it says next, how they came to the rich nation of the famous long-lived
men; and to the coast of the Cimmerians, who never saw the sun, buried
deep in the glens of the snow mountains; and to the fair land of
Hermione, where dwelt the most righteous of all nations; and to the
gates of the world below, and to the dwelling place of dreams.

[Footnote A: Between the Crimæa and Circassia.]

[Footnote B: The Sea of Azov.]

[Footnote C: The Ural Mountains.]

[Footnote D: The Baltic.]

And at last Ancaios shouted: "Endure a little while, brave friends, the
worst is surely past; for I can see the pure west wind ruffle the water,
and hear the roar of ocean on the sands. So raise up the mast, and set
the sail, and face what comes like men."

Then out spoke the magic bough: "Ah, would that I had perished long ago,
and been whelmed by the dread blue rocks, beneath the fierce swell of
the Euxine! Better so, than to wander forever, disgraced by the guilt of
my princes; for the blood of Absyrtus still tracks me, and woe follows
hard upon woe. And now some dark horror will clutch me, if I come near
the Isle of Ierne.[A] Unless you will cling to the land, and sail
southward and southward forever, I shall wander beyond the Atlantic, to
the ocean which has no shore."

Then they blest the magic bough, and sailed southward along the land.
But ere they could pass Ierne, the land of mists and storms, the wild
wind came down, dark and roaring, and caught the sail, and strained the
ropes. And away they drove twelve nights, on the wide wild western sea,
through the foam, and over the rollers, while they saw neither sun nor
stars. And they cried again: "We shall perish, for we know not where we
are. We are lost in the dreary damp darkness, and cannot tell north from
south."

But Lynceus the long sighted called gayly from the bows: "Take heart
again, brave sailors; for I see a pine-clad isle, and the halls of the
kind Earth mother, with a crown of clouds around them."

[Footnote A: Britain.]

But Orpheus said: "Turn from them, for no living man can land there:
there is no harbour on the coast, but steep-walled cliffs all round."

So Ancaios turned the ship away; and for three days more they sailed on,
till they came to Aiaia, Circe's home, and the fairy island of the West.

And there Jason bid them land, and seek about for any sign of living
man. And as they went inland, Circe met them, coming down toward the
ship; and they trembled when they saw her; for her hair, and face, and
robes, shone like flame.

And she came and looked at Medeia; and Medeia hid her face beneath her
veil.

And Circe cried, "Ah, wretched girl, have you forgotten all your sins,
that you come hither to my island, where the flowers bloom all the year
round? Where is your aged father, and the brother whom you killed?
Little do I expect you to return in safety with these strangers whom you
love. I will send you food and wine: but your ship must not stay here,
for it is foul with sin, and foul with sin its crew."

And the heroes prayed her, but in vain, and cried, "Cleanse us from our
guilt!" But she sent them away and said, "Go on to Malea, and there you
may be cleansed, and return home."

Then a fair wind rose, and they sailed eastward, by Tartessus on the
Iberian shore, till they came to the Pillars of Hercules, and the
Mediterranean Sea. And thence they sailed on through the deeps of
Sardinia, and past the Ausonian Islands, and the capes of the Tyrrhenian
shore, till they came to a flowery island, upon a still, bright summer's
eve. And as they neared it, slowly and wearily, they heard sweet songs
upon the shore. But when Medeia heard it, she started, and cried:
"Beware, all heroes, for these are the rocks of the Sirens. You must
pass close by them, for there is no other channel; but those who listen
to that song are lost."

Then Orpheus spoke, the king of all minstrels: "Let them match their
song against mine. I have charmed stones, and trees, and dragons, how
much more the hearts of man!" So he caught up his lyre, and stood upon
the poop, and began his magic song.

And now they could see the Sirens, on Anthemousa, the flowery isle;
three fair maidens sitting on the beach, beneath a red rock in the
setting sun, among beds of crimson poppies and golden asphodel. Slowly
they sung and sleepily, with silver voices, mild and clear, which stole
over the golden waters, and into the hearts of all the heroes, in spite
of Orpheus's song.

And all things stayed around and listened; the gulls sat in white lines
along the rocks; on the beach great seals lay basking, and kept time
with lazy heads; while silver shoals of fish came up to hearken, and
whispered as they broke the shining calm. The Wind overhead hushed his
whistling, as he shepherded his clouds toward the west; and the clouds
stood in mid blue, and listened dreaming, like a flock of golden sheep.

And as the heroes listened, the oars fell from their hands, and their
heads drooped on their breasts, and they closed their heavy eyes; and
they dreamed of bright still gardens, and of slumbers under murmuring
pines, till all their toil seemed foolishness, and they thought of their
renown no more.

Then one lifted his head suddenly, and cried, "What use in wandering
forever? Let us stay here and rest awhile." And another, "Let us row to
the shore, and hear the words they sing." And another, "I care not for
the words, but for the music. They shall sing me to sleep, that I may
rest."

And Butes, the son of Pandion, the fairest of all mortal men, leapt out
and swam toward the shore, crying, "I come, I come, fair maidens, to
live and die here, listening to your song."

Then Medeia clapped her hands together, and cried, "Sing louder,
Orpheus, sing a bolder strain; wake up these hapless sluggards, or none
of them will see the land of Hellas more."

Then Orpheus lifted his harp, and crashed his cunning hand across the
strings; and his music and his voice rose like a trumpet through the
still evening air; into the air it rushed like thunder, till the rocks
rang and the sea; and into their souls it rushed like wine, till all
hearts beat fast within their breasts.

And he sung the song of Perseus, how the Gods led him over land and sea,
and how he slew the loathly Gorgon, and won himself a peerless bride;
and how he sits now with the Gods upon Olympus, a shining star in the
sky, immortal with his immortal bride, and honoured by all men below.

So Orpheus sang, and the Sirens, answering each other across the golden
sea, till Orpheus's voice drowned the Sirens, and the heroes caught
their oars again.

And they cried: "We will be men like Perseus, and we will dare and
suffer to the last. Sing us his song again, brave Orpheus, that we may
forget the Sirens and their spell."

And as Orpheus sang, they dashed their oars into the sea, and kept time
to his music, as they fled fast away; and the Sirens' voices died behind
them, in the hissing of the foam along their wake.

But Butes swam to the shore, and knelt down before the Sirens, and
cried, "Sing on! sing on!" But he could say no more; for a charmed sleep
came over him, and a pleasant humming in his ears; and he sank all along
upon the pebbles, and forgot all heaven and earth, and never looked at
that sad beach around him, all strewn with the bones of men.

Then slowly rose up those three fair sisters, with a cruel smile upon
their lips; and slowly they crept down toward him, like leopards who
creep upon their prey; and their hands were like the talons of eagles,
as they stept across the bones of their victims to enjoy their cruel
feast.

But fairest Aphrodite saw him from the highest Idalian peak, and she
pitied his youth and his beauty, and leapt up from her golden throne;
and like a falling star she cleft the sky, and left a trail of
glittering light, till she stooped to the Isle of the Sirens, and
snatched their prey from their claws. And she lifted Butes as he lay
sleeping, and wrapt him in a golden mist; and she bore him to the peak
of Lilybæum; and he slept there many a pleasant year.

But when the Sirens saw that they were conquered, they shrieked for envy
and rage, and leapt from the beach into the sea, and were changed into
rocks until this day.

Then they came to the straits by Lilybæum, and saw Sicily, the
three-cornered island, under which Enceladus the giant lies groaning day
and night, and when he turns the earth quakes, and his breath bursts out
in roaring flames from the highest cone of Ætna, above the chestnut
woods. And there Charybdis caught them in its fearful coils of wave, and
rolled mast-high about them, and spun them round and round; and they
could go neither back nor forward, while the whirlpool sucked them in.

And while they struggled they saw near them, on the other side of the
strait, a rock stand in the water, with a peak wrapt round in clouds; a
rock which no man could climb, though he had twenty hands and feet, for
the stone was smooth and slippery, as if polished by man's hand; and
half way up a misty cave looked out toward the west.

And when Orpheus saw it, he groaned, and struck his hands together. And
"Little will it help to us," he cried, "to escape the jaws of the
whirlpool; for in that cave lives Scylla, the sea-hag with a young
whelp's voice; my mother warned me of her ere we sailed away from
Hellas; she has six heads, and six long necks, and hides in that dark
cleft. And from her cave she fishes for all things which pass by, for
sharks, and seals, and dolphins, and all the herds of Amphitrite. And
never ship's crew boasted that they came safe by her rock; for she bends
her long necks down to them, and every mouth takes up a man And who will
help us now? For Hera and Zeus hate us, and our ship is foul with guilt;
so we must die, whatever befalls."

Then out of the depths came Thetis, Peleus's silver-footed bride, for
love of her gallant husband, and all her nymphs around her; and they
played like snow-white dolphins, diving on from wave to wave, before the
ship, and in her wake, and beside her, as dolphins play. And they caught
the ship, and guided her, and passed her on from hand to hand, and
tossed her through the billows, as maidens toss the ball. And when
Scylla stooped to seize her, they struck back her ravening heads, and
foul Scylla whined, as a whelp whines, at the touch of their gentle
hands. But she shrank into her cave affrighted; for all bad things
shrink from good; and Argo leapt safe past her, while a fair breeze rose
behind. Then Thetis and her nymphs sank down to their gardens of green
and purple, where live flowers of bloom all the year round; while the
heroes went on rejoicing, yet dreading what might come next.

After that they rowed on steadily for many a weary day, till they saw a
long high island, and beyond it a mountain land. And they searched till
they found a harbour, and there rowed boldly in. But after awhile they
stopped, and wondered; for there stood a great city on the shore, and
temples and walls and gardens, and castles high in air upon the cliffs.
And on either side they saw a harbour, with a narrow mouth, but wide
within; and black ships without number, high and dry upon the shore.

Then Ancaius, the wise helmsman, spoke: "What new wonder is this? I know
all isles, and harbours, and the windings of all the seas; and this
should be Corcyra, where a few wild goatherds dwell. But whence come
these new harbours, and vast works of polished stone?"

But Jason said: "They can be no savage people. We will go in and take
our chance."

So they rowed into the harbour, among a thousand black-beaked ships,
each larger far than Argo, toward a quay of polished stone. And they
wondered at that mighty city, with its roofs of burnished brass, and
long and lofty walls of marble, with strong palisades above. And the
quays were full of people, merchants, and mariners, and slaves, going to
and fro with merchandise among the crowd of ships. And the heroes'
hearts were humbled, and they looked at each other and said: "We thought
ourselves a gallant crew when we sailed from Iolcos by the sea; but how
small we look before this city, like an ant before a hive of bees."

Then the sailors hailed them roughly from the quay:

"What men are you?--we want no strangers here, nor pirates. We keep our
business to ourselves."

But Jason answered gently, with many a flattering word, and praised
their city and their harbour, and their fleet of gallant ships. "Surely
you are the children of Poseidon, and the masters of the sea; and we are
but poor wandering mariners, worn out with thirst and toil. Give us but
food and water, and we will go on our voyage in peace."

Then the sailors laughed and answered: "Stranger, you are no fool; you
talk like an honest man, and you shall find us honest too. We are the
children of Poseidon, and the masters of the sea; but come ashore to us,
and you shall have the best that we can give."

So they limped ashore, all stiff and weary, with long ragged beards and
sunburnt cheeks, and garments torn and weather-stained, and weapons
rusted with the spray, while the sailors laughed at them (for they were
rough-tongued, though their hearts were frank and kind). And one said;
"These fellows are but raw sailors; they look as if they had been
sea-sick all the day." And another: "Their legs have grown crooked with
much rowing, till they waddle in their walk like ducks."

At that Idas the rash would have struck them; but Jason held him back,
till one of the merchant kings spoke to them, a tall and stately man.

"Do not be angry, strangers; the sailor boys must have their jest. But
we will treat you justly and kindly, for strangers and poor men come
from God; and you seem no common sailors by your strength, and height,
and weapons. Come up with me to the palace of Alcinous, the rich
sea-going king, and we will feast you well and heartily; and after that
you shall tell us your name."

But Medeia hung back, and trembled, and whispered in Jason's ear, "We
are betrayed, and are going to our ruin; for I see my countrymen among
the crowd; dark-eyed Colchi in steel mail shirts, such as they wear in
my father's land."

"It is too late to turn," said Jason. And he spoke to the merchant king:
"What country is this, good sir; and what is this new-built town?"

"This is the land of the Phæaces, beloved by all the Immortals; for they
come hither and feast like friends with us, and sit by our side in the
hall. Hither we came from Liburnia to escape the unrighteous Cyclopes;
for they robbed us, peaceful merchants, of our hard-earned wares and
wealth. So Nausithous, the son of Poseidon, brought us hither, and died
in peace; and now his son Alcinous rules us, and Arete the wisest of
queens."

So they went up across the square, and wondered still more as they went;
for along the quays lay in order great cables, and yards, and masts,
before the fair temple of Poseidon, the blue-haired king of the seas.
And round the square worked the shipwrights, as many in number as ants,
twining ropes, and hewing timber, and smoothing long yards and oars. And
the Minuai went on in silence through clean white marble streets, till
they came to the hall of Alcinous, and they wondered then still more.
For the lofty palace shone aloft in the sun, with walls of plated brass,
from the threshold to the innermost chamber, and the doors were of
silver and gold. And on each side of the doorway sat living dogs of
gold, who never grew old or died, so well Hephaistus had made them in
his forges in smoking Lemnos, and gave them to Alcinous to guard his
gates by night. And within, against the walls, stood thrones on either
side, down the whole length of the hall, strewn with rich glossy
shawls; and on them the merchant kings of those crafty sea-roving
Phæaces sat eating and drinking in pride, and feasting there all the
year round. And boys of molten gold stood each on a polished altar, and
held torches in their hands, to give light all night to the guests. And
round the house sat fifty maid servants, some grinding the meal in the
mill, some turning the spindle, some weaving at the loom, while their
hands twinkled as they passed the shuttle, like quivering aspen leaves.

And outside before the palace a great garden was walled round, filled
full of stately fruit trees, with olives and sweet figs, and
pomegranates, pears, and apples, which bore the whole year round. For
the rich southwest wind fed them, till pear grew ripe on pear, fig on
fig, and grape on grape, all the winter and the spring. And at the
further end gay flower beds bloomed through all seasons of the year; and
two fair fountains rose, and ran, one through the garden grounds, and
one beneath the palace gate, to water all the town. Such noble gifts the
heavens had given to Alcinous the wise.

So they went in, and saw him sitting, like Poseidon, on his throne, with
his golden sceptre by him, in garments stiff with gold, and in his hand
a sculptured goblet, as he pledged the merchant kings; and beside him
stood Arete, his wise and lovely queen, and leaned against a pillar, as
she spun her golden threads.

Then Alcinous rose, and welcomed them, and bade them sit and eat; and
the servants brought them tables, and bread, and meat, and wine.

But Medeia went on trembling toward Arete, the fair queen, and fell at
her knees, and clasped them, and cried weeping as she knelt:

"I am your guest, fair queen, and I entreat you be Zeus from whom
prayers come. Do not send me back to my father, to die some dreadful
death; but let me go my way, and bear my burden. Have I not had enough
of punishment and shame?"

"Who are you, strange maiden? and what is the meaning of your prayer?"

"I am Medeia, daughter of Aietes, and I saw my countrymen here to-day;
and I know that they are come to find me, and take me home to die some
dreadful death."

Then Arete frowned, and said: "Lead this girl in, my maidens; and let
the kings decide, not I."

And Alcinous leapt up from his throne, and cried, "Speak, strangers, who
are you? And who is this maiden?"

"We are the heroes of the Minuai," said Jason; "and this maiden has
spoken truth. We are the men who took the golden fleece, the men whose
fame has run round every shore. We came hither out of the ocean, after
sorrows such as man never saw before. We went out many, and come back
few, for many a noble comrade have we lost. So let us go, as you should
let your guests go, in peace; that the world may say, 'Alcinous is a
just king.'"

But Alcinous frowned, and stood deep in thought; and at last he spoke:

"Had not the deed been done, which is done, I should have said this day
to myself, 'It is an honour to Alcinous, and to his children after him,
that the far-famed Argonauts are his guests.' But these Colchi are my
guests, as you are; and for this month they have waited here with all
their fleet; for they have hunted all the seas of Hellas, and could not
find you, and dared neither go further, nor go home."

"Let them choose out their champions, and we will fight them, man for
man."

"No guest of ours shall fight upon our island; and if you go outside,
they will outnumber you. I will do justice between you; for I know and
do what is right."

Then he turned to his kings, and said: "This may stand over till
to-morrow. To-night we will feast our guests, and hear the story of all
their wanderings, and how they came hither out of the ocean."

So Alcinous bade the servants take the heroes in, and bathe them, and
give them clothes. And they were glad when they saw the warm water, for
it was long since they had bathed. And they washed off the sea salt from
their limbs, and anointed themselves from head to foot with oil, and
combed out their golden hair. Then they came back again into the hall,
while the merchant kings rose up to do them honour. And each man said to
his neighbour: "No wonder that these men won fame. How they stand now
like Giants, or Titans, or Immortals come down from Olympus, though many
a winter has worn them, and many a fearful storm. What must they have
been when they sailed from Iolcos, in the bloom of their youth, long
ago?"

Then they went out to the garden; and the merchant princes said:
"Heroes, run races with us. Let us see whose feet are nimblest."

"We cannot race against you, for our limbs are stiff from sea; and we
have lost our two swift comrades, the sons of the north wind. But do not
think us cowards; if you wish to try our strength, we will shoot and
box, and wrestle, against any men on earth."

And Alcinous smiled, and answered: "I believe you, gallant guests; with
your long limbs and broad shoulders, we could never match you here. For
we care nothing here for boxing, or for shooting with the bow; but for
feasts, and songs, and harping, and dancing, and running races, to
stretch our limbs on shore."

So they danced there and ran races, the jolly merchant kings, till the
night fell, and all went in.

And then they ate and drank, and comforted their weary souls, till
Alcinous called a herald, and bade him go and fetch the harper.

The herald went out, and fetched the harper, and led him in by the hand;
and Alcinous cut him a piece of meat from the fattest of the haunch, and
sent it to him, and said: "Sing to us, noble harper, and rejoice the
heroes' hearts."

So the harper played and sang, while the dancers danced strange figures;
and after that the tumblers showed their tricks, till the heroes laughed
again.

Then, "Tell me, heroes," asked Alcinous, "you who have sailed the ocean
round, and seen the manners of all nations, have you seen such dancers
as ours here? or heard such music and such singing? We hold ours to be
the best on earth."

"Such dancing we have never seen," said Orpheus; "and your singer is a
happy man; for Phœbus himself must have taught him, or else he is the
son of a Muse; as I am also, and have sung once or twice, though not so
well as he."

"Sing to us, then, noble stranger," said Alcinous; "and we will give you
precious gifts."

So Orpheus took his magic harp, and sang to them a stirring song of
their voyage from Iolcos, and their dangers, and how they won the
golden fleece; and of Medeia's love, and how she helped them, and went
with them over land and sea; and of all their fearful dangers, from
monsters, and rocks, and storms, till the heart of Arete was softened,
and all the women wept. And the merchant kings rose up, each man from
off his golden throne, and clasped their hands, and shouted: "Hail to
the noble Argonauts, who sailed the unknown seal"

Then he went on, and told their journey over the sluggish northern main,
and through the shoreless outer ocean, to the fairy island of the West;
and of the Sirens, and Scylla, and Charybdis, and all the wonders they
had seen, till midnight passed, and the day dawned; but the kings never
thought of sleep. Each man sat still and listened, with his chin upon
his hand.

And at last when Orpheus had ended, they all went thoughtful out, and
the heroes lay down to sleep, beneath the sounding porch outside, where
Arete had strewn them rugs and carpets, in the sweet still summer night.

But Arete pleaded hard with her husband for Medeia, for her heart was
softened. And she said: "The Gods will punish her, not we. After all,
she is our guest and my suppliant, and prayers are the daughters of
Zeus. And who, too, dare part man and wife, after all they have endured
together?"

And Alcinous smiled. "The minstrel's song has charmed you; but I must
remember what is right; for songs cannot alter justice; and I must be
faithful to my name. Alcinous I am called, the man of sturdy sense, and
Alcinous I will be." But for all that, Arete besought him, until she won
him round.

So next morning he sent a herald, and called the kings into the square,
and said: "This is a puzzling matter; remember but one thing. These
Minuai live close by us, and we may meet them often on the seas; but
Aietes lives afar off, and we have only heard his name. Which, then, of
the two is it safer to offend, the men near us, or the men far off?"

The princes laughed, and praised his wisdom; and Alcinous called the
heroes to the square, and the Colchi also; and they came and stood
opposite each other; but Medeia stayed in the palace. Then Alcinous
spoke: "Heroes of the Colchi, what is your errand about this lady?"

"To carry her home with us, that she may die a shameful death; but if we
return without her, we must die the death she should have died."

"What say you to this, Jason the Æolid?" said Alcinous, turning to the
Minuai.

"I say," said the cunning Jason, "that they are come here on a bootless
errand. Do you think that you can make her follow you, heroes of the
Colchi? her, who knows all spells and charms? She will cast away your
ships on quicksands, or call down on you Brimo the wild huntress; or the
chains will fall from off her wrists, and she will escape in her dragon
car; or if not thus, some other way; for she has a thousand plans and
wiles. And why return home at all, brave heroes, and face the long seas
again, and the Bosphorus, and the stormy Euxine, and double all your
toil? There is many a fair land round these coasts, which waits for
gallant men like you. Better to settle there, and build a city, and let
Aietes and Colchis help themselves."

Then a murmur rose among the Colchi, and some cried, "He has spoken
well"; and some, "We have had enough of roving, we will sail the seas
no more!" And the chief said at last, "Be it so, then; a plague she has
been to us, and a plague to the house of her father, and a plague she
will be to you. Take her, since you are no wiser; and we will sail away
toward the north."

Then Alcinous gave them food, and water, and garments, and rich presents
of all sorts; and he gave the same to the Minuai, and sent them all away
in peace.

So Jason kept the dark witch maiden to breed him woe and shame; and the
Colchi went northward into the Adriatic, and settled, and built towns
along the shore.

Then the heroes rowed away to the eastward, to reach Hellas their
beloved land; but a storm came down upon them, and swept them far away
toward the south. And they rowed till they were spent with struggling,
through the darkness and the blinding rain, but where they were they
could not tell, and they gave up all hope of life. And at last they
touched the ground, and when daylight came they waded to the shore; and
saw nothing round but sand, and desolate salt pools; for they had come
to the quicksands of the Syrtis, and the dreary treeless flats, which
lie between Numidia and Cyrene, on the burning shore of Africa. And
there they wandered starving for many a weary day, ere they could launch
their ship again, and gain the open sea. And there Canthus was killed
while he was trying to drive off sheep, by a stone which a herdsman
threw.

And there, too, Mopsus died, the seer who knew the voices of all birds;
but he could not foretell his own end, for he was bitten in the foot by
a snake, one of those which sprang from the Gorgon's head when Perseus
carried it across the sands.

At last they rowed away toward the northward, for many a weary day,
till their water was spent, and their food eaten; and they were worn out
with hunger and thirst. But at last they saw a long steep island, and a
blue peak high among the clouds; and they knew it for the peak of Ida,
and the famous land of Crete. And they said, "We will land in Crete, and
see Minos the just king, and all his glory and his wealth; at least he
will treat us hospitably, and let us fill our water casks upon the
shore."

But when they came nearer to the island they saw a wondrous sight upon
the cliffs. For on a cape to the westward stood a giant, taller than any
mountain pine; who glittered aloft against the sky like a tower of
burnished brass. He turned and looked on all sides round him, till he
saw the Argo and her crew; and when he saw them he came toward them,
more swiftly than the swiftest horse, leaping across the glens at a
bound, and striding at one step from down to down. And when he came
abreast of them he brandished his arms up and down, as a ship hoists and
lowers her yards, and shouted with his brazen throat like a trumpet from
off the hills: "You are pirates, you are robbers! If you dare land here,
you die."

Then the heroes cried: "We are no pirates. We are all good men and true;
and all we ask is food and water"; but the giant cried the more--

"You are robbers, you are pirates all; I know you; and if you land, you
shall die the death."

Then he waved his arms again as a signal, and they saw the people flying
inland, driving their flocks before them, while a great flame arose
among the hills. Then the giant ran up a valley and vanished; and the
heroes lay on their oars in fear.

But Medeia stood watching all, from under her steep black brows, with a
cunning smile upon her lips, and a cunning plot within her heart. At
last she spoke; "I know this giant. I heard of him in the East.
Hephaistos the Fire King made him, in his forge in Ætna beneath the
earth, and called him Talus, and gave him to Minos for a servant, to
guard the coast of Crete. Thrice a day he walks round the island, and
never stops to sleep; and if strangers land he leaps into his furnace,
which flames there among the hills; and when he is red hot he rushes on
them, and burns them in his brazen hands."

Then all the heroes cried, "What shall we do, wise Medeia? We must have
water, or we die of thirst. Flesh and blood we can face fairly; but who
can face this red-hot brass?"

"I can face red-hot brass, if the tale I hear be true. For they say
that he has but one vein in all his body, filled with liquid fire; and
that this vein is closed with a nail; but I know not where that nail is
placed. But if I can get it once into these hands, you shall water your
ship here in peace."

Then she bade them put her on shore, and row off again, and wait what
would befall.

And the heroes obeyed her unwillingly; for they were ashamed to leave
her so alone; but Jason said, "She is dearer to me than to any of you,
yet I will trust her freely on shore; she has more plots than we can
dream of, in the windings of that fair and cunning head."

So they left the witch maiden on the shore; and she stood there in her
beauty all alone, till the giant strode back red hot from head to heel,
while the grass hissed and smoked beneath his tread.

And when he saw the maiden alone, he stopped; and she looked boldly up
into his face without moving, and began her magic song:

"Life is short, though life is sweet; and even men of brass and fire
must die. The brass must rust, the fire must cool, for time gnaws all
things in their turn. Life is short, though life is sweet; but sweeter
to live forever; sweeter to live ever youthful like the Gods, who have
ichor in their veins; ichor which gives life, and youth, and joy, and a
bounding heart."

Then Talus said, "Who are you, strange maiden; and where is this ichor
of youth?"

Then Medeia held up a flask of crystal, and said, "Here is the ichor of
youth. I am Medeia the enchantress; my sister Circe gave me this, and
said, 'Go and reward Talus the faithful servant, for his fame is gone
out into all lands.' So come, and I will pour this into your veins, that
you may live forever young."

And he listened to her false words, that simple Talus, and came near;
and Medeia said, "Dip yourself in the sea first, and cool yourself, lest
you burn my tender hands, then show me where the nail in your vein is,
that I may pour the ichor in."

Then that simple Talus dipped himself in the sea, till it hissed, and
roared, and smoked; and came and knelt before Medeia, and showed her the
secret nail.

And she drew the nail out gently; but she poured no ichor in; and
instead the liquid fire spouted forth, like a stream of red-hot iron.
And Talus tried to leap up, crying, "You have betrayed me, false witch
maiden!" But she lifted up her hands before him, and sang, till he sank
beneath her spell. And as he sank, his brazen limbs clanked heavily, and
the earth groaned beneath his weight; and the liquid fire ran from his
heel, like a stream of lava to the sea; and Medeia laughed, and called
to the heroes, "Come ashore, and water your ship in peace."

So they came, and found the giant lying dead; and they fell down, and
kissed Medeia's feet; and watered their ship, and took sheep and oxen,
and so left that inhospitable shore.

At last, after many more adventures, they came to the Cape of Malea, at
the southwest point of the Peloponnese. And there they offered
sacrifices, and Orpheus purged them from their guilt. Then they rowed
away again to the northward, past the Laconian shore, and came all worn
and tired by Sunium, and up the long Eubœan Strait, until they saw
once more Pelion, and Aphetai, and Iolcos by the sea.

And they ran the ship ashore; but they had no strength left to haul her
up the beach; and they crawled out on the pebbles, and sat down, and
wept till they could weep no more. For the houses and the trees were all
altered; and all the faces which they saw were strange; and their joy
was swallowed up in sorrow, while they thought of their youth, and all
their labour, and the gallant comrades they had lost.

And the people crowded round, and asked them, "Who are you, that you sit
weeping here?"

"We are the sons of your princes, who sailed out many a year ago. We
went to fetch the golden fleece; and we have brought it, and grief
therewith. Give us news of our fathers and our mothers, if any of them
be left alive on earth."

Then there was shouting and laughing, and weeping; and all the kings
came to the shore, and they led away the heroes to their homes, and
bewailed the valiant dead.

Then Jason went up with Medeia to the palace of his uncle Pelias. And
when he came in, Pelias sat by the hearth, crippled and blind with age;
while opposite him sat Æson, Jason's father, crippled and blind
likewise; and the two old men's heads shook together, as they tried to
warm themselves before the fire.

And Jason fell down at his father's knees, and wept, and called him by
his name. And the old man stretched his hands out, and felt him, and
said: "Do not mock me, young hero. My son Jason is dead long ago at
sea."

"I am your own son Jason, whom you trusted to the Centaur upon Pelion;
and I have brought home the golden fleece, and a princess of the Sun's
race for my bride. So now give me up the kingdom, Pelias my uncle, and
fulfil your promise as I have fulfilled mine."

Then his father clung to him like a child, and wept, and would not let
him go; and cried, "Now I shall not go down lonely to my grave. Promise
me never to leave me till I die."


PART VI

_What Was the End of the Heroes_

And now I wish that I could end my story pleasantly; but it is no fault
of mine that I cannot. The old songs end it sadly, and I believe that
they are right and wise; for though the heroes were purified at Malea,
yet sacrifices cannot make bad hearts good, and Jason had taken a wicked
wife, and he had to bear his burden to the last.

And first she laid a cunning plot, to punish that poor old Pelias,
instead of letting him die in peace.

For she told his daughters: "I can make old things young again; I will
show you how easy it is to do." So she took an old ram and killed him,
and put him in a cauldron with magic herbs; and whispered her spells
over him, and he leapt out again a young lamb. So that "Medeia's
cauldron" is a proverb still, by which we mean times of war and change,
when the world has become old and feeble, and grows young again through
bitter pains.

Then she said to Pelias's daughters: "Do to your father as I did to this
ram, and he will grow young and strong again." But she only told them
half the spell; so they failed, while Medeia mocked them; and poor old
Pelias died, and his daughters came to misery. But the songs say she
cured Æson, Jason's father, and he became young and strong again.

But Jason could not love her, after all her cruel deeds. So he was
ungrateful to her, and wronged her: and she revenged herself on him. And
a terrible revenge she took--too terrible to speak of here. But you will
hear of it yourselves when you grow up, for it has been sung in noble
poetry and music; and whether it be true or not, it stands forever as a
warning to us, not to seek for help from evil persons, or to gain good
ends by evil means. For if we use an adder even against our enemies, it
will turn again and sting us.

But of all the other heroes there is many a brave tale left, which I
have no space to tell you, so you must read them for yourselves--of the
hunting of the boar in Calydon, which Meleager killed; and of Heracles's
twelve famous labours; and of the seven who fought at Thebes; and of
the noble love of Castor and Polydeuces, the twin Dioscouroi; how when
one died, the other would not live without him, so they shared their
immortality between them; and Zeus changed them into the two twin stars,
which never rise both at once.

And what became of Cheiron, the good immortal beast? That, too, is a sad
story; for the heroes never saw him more. He was wounded by a poisoned
arrow, at Pholoc among the hills, when Heracles opened the fatal wine
jar, which Cheiron had warned him not to touch. And the Centaurs smelt
the wine, and flocked to it, and fought for it with Heracles; but he
killed them all with his poisoned arrows, and Cheiron was left alone.
Then Cheiron took up one of the arrows, and dropped it by chance upon
his foot; and the poison ran like fire along his veins, and he lay down,
and longed to die; and cried: "Through wine I perish, the bane of all my
race. Why should I live forever in this agony? Who will take my
immortality that I may die?"

Then Prometheus answered, the good Titan, whom Heracles had set free
from Caucasus: "I will take your immortality and live forever, that I
may help poor mortal men." So Cheiron gave him his immortality, and
died, and had rest from pain. And Heracles and Prometheus wept over him,
and went to bury him on Pelion; but Zeus took him up among the stars, to
live forever, grand and mild, low down in the far southern sky.

And in time the heroes died, all but Nestor the silver-tongued old man;
and left behind them valiant sons, but not so great as they had been.
Yet their fame, too, lives till this day; for they fought at the ten
years' siege of Troy; and their story is in the book which we call
Homer, in two of the noblest songs on earth; the Iliad, which tells us
of the siege of Troy, and Achilles's quarrel with the kings; and the
Odyssey, which tells the wanderings of Odysseus, through many lands for
many years; and how Alcinous sent him home at last, safe to Ithaca his
beloved island, and to Penelope his faithful wife, and Telemachus his
son, and Euphorbus the noble swineherd, and the old dog who licked his
hand and died.




CHAPTER XI

THE GIANT BUILDER


Ages and ages ago, when the world was first made, the gods decided to
build a beautiful city high above the heavens, the most glorious and
wonderful city that ever was known. Asgard was to be its name, and it
was to stand on Ida Plain under the shade of Yggdrasil, the great tree
whose roots were underneath the earth.

First of all they built a house with a silver roof, where there were
seats for all the twelve chiefs. In the midst, and high above the rest,
was the wonder throne of Odin the All-Father, whence he could see
everything that happened in the sky or on the earth or in the sea. Next
they made a fair house for Queen Frigg and her lovely daughters. Then
they built a smithy, with its great hammers, tongs, anvils, and bellows,
where the gods could work at their favourite trade, the making of
beautiful things out of gold; which they did so well that folk name that
time the Golden Age. Afterward, as they had more leisure, they built
separate houses for all the Æsir, each more beautiful than the
preceding, for of course they were continually growing more skilful.
They saved Father Odin's palace until the last, for they meant this to
be the largest and the most splendid of all.

Gladsheim, the home of joy, was the name of Odin's house, and it was
built all of gold, set in the midst of a wood whereof the trees had
leaves of ruddy gold--like an autumn-gilded forest. For the safety of
All-Father it was surrounded by a roaring river and by a high picket
fence; and there was a great courtyard within.

The glory of Gladsheim was its wondrous hall, radiant with gold, the
most lovely room that time has ever seen. Valhalla, the Hall of Heroes,
was the name of it, and it was roofed with the mighty shields of
warriors. The ceiling was made of interlacing spears, and there was a
portal at the west end before which hung a great gray wolf, while over
him a fierce eagle hovered. The hall was so huge that it had 540 gates,
through each of which 800 men could march abreast. Indeed, there needed
to be room, for this was the hall where every morning Odin received all
the brave warriors who had died in battle on the earth below; and there
were many heroes in those days.

This was the reward which the gods gave to courage. When a hero had
gloriously lost his life, the Valkyries, the nine warrior daughters of
Odin, brought his body up to Valhalla on their white horses that gallop
the clouds. There they lived forever after in happiness, enjoying the
things that they had most loved upon earth. Every morning they armed
themselves and went out to fight with one another in the great
courtyard. It was a wondrous game, wondrously played. No matter how
often a hero was killed, he became alive again in time to return
perfectly well to Valhalla, where he ate a delicious breakfast with the
Jisir; while the beautiful Valkyries who had first brought him thither
waited at table and poured the blessed mead, which only the immortal
taste. A happy life it was for the heroes, and a happy life for all who
dwelt in Asgard; for this was before trouble had come among the gods,
following the mischief of Loki.

This is how the trouble began. From the beginning of time, the giants
had been unfriendly to the Æsir, because the giants were older and huger
and more wicked; besides, they were jealous because the good Æsir were
fast gaining more wisdom and power than the giants had ever known. It
was the Æsir who set the fair brother and sister, Sun and Moon, in the
sky to give light to men; and it was they also who made the jewelled
stars out of sparks from the place of fire. The giants hated the Æsir,
and tried all in their power to injure them and the men of the earth
below, whom the Æsir loved and cared for. The gods had already built a
wall around Midgard, the world of men, to keep the giants out; built it
of the bushy eyebrows of Ymir, the oldest and hugest of giants. Between
Asgard and the giants flowed Ifing, the great river on which ice never
formed, and which the gods crossed on the rainbow bridge. But this was
not protection enough. Their beautiful new city needed a fortress.

So the word went forth in Asgard: "We must build us a fortress against
the giants; the hugest, strongest, finest fortress that ever was built."

Now one day, soon after they had announced this decision, there came a
mighty man stalking up the rainbow bridge that led to Asgard city.

"Who goes there!" cried Heimdal the watchman, whose eyes were so keen
that he could see for a hundred miles around, and whose ears were so
sharp that he could hear the grass growing in the meadow and the wool on
the backs of the sheep. "Who goes there! No one can enter Asgard if I
say no."

"I am a builder," said the stranger, who was a huge fellow with sleeves
rolled up to show the iron muscles of his arms. "I am a builder of
strong towers, and I have heard that the folk of Asgard need one to help
them raise a fair fortress in their city."

Heimdal looked at the stranger narrowly, for there was that about him
which his sharp eyes did not like. But he made no answer, only blew on
his golden horn, which was so loud that it sounded through all the
world. At this signal all the Æsir came running to the rainbow bridge,
from wherever they happened to be, to find out who was coming to Asgard.
For it was Heimdal's duty ever to warn them of the approach of the
unknown.

"This fellow says he is a builder," quoth Heimdal. "And he would fain
build us a fortress in the city."

"Ay, that I would," nodded the stranger, "Look at my iron arm; look at
my broad back; look at my shoulders. Am I not the workman you need?"

"Truly, he is a mighty figure," vowed Odin, looking at him approvingly.
"How long will it take you alone to build our fortress? We can allow but
one stranger at a time within our city, for safety's sake."

"In three half-years," replied the stranger, "I will undertake to build
for you a castle so strong that not even the giants, should they swarm
hither over Midgard--not even they could enter without your leave."

"Aha!" cried Father Odin, well pleased at this offer. "And what reward
do you ask, friend, for help so timely?"

The stranger hummed and hawed and pulled his long beard while he
thought. Then he spoke suddenly, as if the idea had just come into his
mind. "I will name my price, friends," he said; "a small price for so
great a deed. I ask you to give me Freia for my wife, and those two
sparkling jewels, the Sun and Moon."

At this demand the gods looked grave; for Freia was their dearest
treasure. She was the most beautiful maid who ever lived, the light and
life of heaven, and if she should leave Asgard, joy would go with her;
while the Sun and Moon were the light and life of the Æsir's children,
men, who lived in the little world below. But Loki the sly whispered
that they would be safe enough if they made another condition on their
part, so hard that the builder could not fulfil it. After thinking
cautiously, he spoke for them all.

"Mighty man," quoth he, "we are willing to agree to your price--upon one
condition. It is too long a time that you ask; we cannot wait three
half-years for our castle; that is equal to three centuries when one is
in a hurry. See that you finish the fort without help in one winter, one
short winter, and you shall have fair Freia with the Sun and Moon. But
if, on the first day of summer, one stone is wanting to the walls, or if
anyone has given you aid in the building, then your reward is lost, and
you shall depart without payment." So spoke Loki, in the name of all the
gods; but the plan was his own.

At first the stranger shook his head and frowned, saying that in so
short a time no one unaided could complete the undertaking. At last he
made another offer. "Let me have but my good horse to help me, and I
will try," he urged. "Let me bring the useful Svadilföri with me to the
task, and I will finish the work in one winter of short days, or lose my
reward. Surely, you will not deny me this little help, from one
four-footed friend."

Then again the Æsir consulted, and the wiser of them were doubtful
whether it were best to accept the stranger's offer so strangely made.
But again Loki urged them to accept. "Surely, there is no harm," he
said. "Even with his old horse to help him, he cannot build the castle
in the promised time. We shall gain a fortress without trouble and with
never a price to pay."

Loki was so eager that, although the other Æsir did not like this crafty
way of making bargains, they finally consented. Then in the presence of
the heroes, with the Valkyries and Mimer's head for witnesses, the
stranger and the Æsir gave solemn promise that the bargain should be
kept.

On the first day of winter the strange builder began his work, and
wondrous was the way he set about it. His strength seemed as the
strength of a hundred men. As for his horse Svadilföri, he did more work
by half than even the mighty builder. In the night he dragged the
enormous rocks that were to be used in building the castle, rocks as big
as mountains of the earth; while in the daytime the stranger piled them
into place with his iron arms. The Æsir watched him with amazement;
never was seen such strength in Asgard. Neither Tŷr the stout nor
Thor the strong could match the power of the stranger. The gods began to
look at one another uneasily. Who was this mighty one who had come among
them, and what if after all he should win his reward? Freia trembled in
her palace, and the Sun and Moon grew dim with fear.

Still the work went on, and the fort was piling higher and higher, by
day and by night. There were but three days left before the end of
winter, and already the building was so tall and so strong that it was
safe from the attacks of any giant. The Æsir were delighted with their
fine new castle; but their pride was dimmed by the fear that it must be
paid for at all too costly a price. For only the gateway remained to be
completed, and unless the stranger should fail to finish that in the
next three days, they must give him Freia with the Sun and Moon.

The Æsir held a meeting upon Ida Plain, a meeting full of fear and
anger. At last they realised what they had done; they had made a bargain
with one of the giants, their enemies; and if he won the prize, it would
mean sorrow and darkness in heaven and upon earth. "How did we happen to
agree to so mad a bargain?" they asked one another. "Who suggested the
wicked plan which bids fair to cost us all that we most cherish?" Then
they remembered that it was Loki who had made the plan; it was he who
had insisted that it be carried out; and they blamed him for all the
trouble.

"It is your counsels, Loki, that have brought this danger upon us,"
quoth Father Odin, frowning. "You chose the way of guile, which is not
our way. It now remains for you to help us by guile, if you can. But if
you cannot save for us Freia and the Sun and Moon, you shall die. This
is my word." All the other Æsir agreed that this was just. Thor alone
was away hunting evil demons at the other end of the world, so he did
not know what was going on, and what dangers were threatening Asgard.

Loki was much frightened at the word of All-Father. "It was my fault,"
he cried, "but how was I to know that he was a giant? He had disguised
himself so that he seemed but a strong man. And as for his horse--it
looks much like that of other folk. If it were not for the horse, he
could not finish the work. Ha! I have a thought! The builder shall not
finish the gate; the giant shall not receive his payment. I will cheat
the fellow."

Now it was the last night of winter, and there remained but a few stones
to put in place on the top of the wondrous gateway. The giant was sure
of his prize, and chuckled to himself as he went out with his horse to
drag the remaining stones; for he did not know that the Æsir had guessed
at last who he was, and that Loki was plotting to outwit him. Hardly had
he gone to work when out of the wood came running a pretty little mare,
who neighed to Svadilföri as if inviting the tired horse to leave his
work and come to the green fields for a holiday.

Svadilföri, you must remember, had been working hard all winter, with
never a sight of four-footed creature of his kind, and he was very
lonesome and tired of dragging stones. Giving a snort of disobedience,
off he ran after this new friend toward the grassy meadows. Off went the
giant after him, howling with rage, and running for dear life, as he saw
not only his horse but his chance of success slipping out of reach. It
was a mad chase, and all Asgard thundered with the noise of galloping
hoofs and the giant's mighty tread. The mare who raced ahead was Loki in
disguise, and he led Svadilföri far out of reach, to a hidden meadow
that he knew; so that the giant howled and panted up and down all night
long, without catching even a sight of his horse.

Now when the morning came the gateway was still unfinished, and night
and winter had ended at the same hour. The giant's time was over, and he
had forfeited his reward. The Æsir came flocking to the gateway, and
how they laughed and triumphed when they found three stones wanting to
complete the gate!

"You have failed, fellow," judged Father Odin sternly, "and no price
shall we pay for work that is still undone. You have failed. Leave
Asgard quickly; we have seen all we want of you and of your race."

Then the giant knew that he was discovered, and he was mad with rage.
"It was a trick!" he bellowed, assuming his own proper form, which was
huge as a mountain, and towered high beside the fortress that he had
built. "It was a wicked trick. You shall pay for this in one way or
another. I cannot tear down the castle which, ungrateful ones, I have
built you, stronger than the strength of any giant. But I will demolish
the rest of your shining city!" Indeed, he would have done so in his
mighty rage; but at this moment Thor, whom Heimdal had called from the
end of the earth by one blast of the golden horn, came rushing to the
rescue, drawn in his chariot of goats. Thor jumped to the ground close
beside the giant, and before that huge fellow knew what had happened,
his head was rolling upon the ground at Father Odin's feet; for with one
blow Thor had put an end to the giant's wickedness and had saved Asgard.

"This is the reward you deserve!" Thor cried. "Not Freia nor the Sun and
Moon, but the death that I have in store for all the enemies of the
Æsir."

In this extraordinary way the noble city of Asgard was made safe and
complete by the addition of a fortress which no one, not even the giant
who built it, could injure, it was so wonder-strong. But always at the
top of the gate were lacking three great stones that no one was mighty
enough to lift. This was a reminder to the Æsir that now they had the
race of giants for their everlasting enemies. And though Loki's trick
had saved them Freia, and for the world the Sun and Moon, it was the
beginning of trouble in Asgard which lasted as long as Loki lived to
make mischief with his guile.




CHAPTER XII

HOW ODIN LOST HIS EYE


In the beginning of things, before there was any world or sun, moon, and
stars, there were the giants; for these were the oldest creatures that
ever breathed. They lived in Jotunheim, the land of frost and darkness,
and their hearts were evil. Next came the gods, the good Æsir, who made
earth and sky and sea, and who dwelt in Asgard, above the heavens. Then
were created the queer little dwarfs, who lived underground in the
caverns of the mountains, working at their mines of metal and precious
stones. Last of all, the gods made men to dwell in Midgard, the good
world that we know, between which and the glorious home of the Æsir
stretched Bifröst, the bridge of rainbows.

In those days, folk say, there was a mighty ash tree named Yggdrasil, so
vast that its branches shaded the whole earth and stretched up into
heaven where the Æsir dwelt, while its roots sank far down below the
lowest depth. In the branches of the big ash tree lived a queer family
of creatures. First, there was a great eagle, who was wiser than any
bird that ever lived--except the two ravens, Thought and Memory, who sat
upon Father Odin's shoulders and told him the secrets which they learned
in their flight over the wide world. Near the great eagle perched a
hawk, and four antlered deer browsed among the buds of Yggdrasil. At
the foot of the tree coiled a huge serpent, who was always gnawing
hungrily at its roots, with a whole colony of little snakes to keep him
company--so many that they could never be counted. The eagle at the top
of the tree and the serpent at its foot were enemies, always saying hard
things of each other. Between the two skipped up and down a little
squirrel, a tale bearer and a gossip, who repeated each unkind remark
and, like the malicious neighbour that he was, kept their quarrel ever
fresh and green.

In one place at the roots of Yggdrasil was a fair fountain called the
Urdar-well, where the three Norn maidens, who knew the past, present,
and future, dwelt with their pets, the two white swans. This was magic
water in the fountain, which the Norns sprinkled every day upon the
giant tree to keep it green--water so sacred that everything which
entered it became white as the film of an eggshell. Close beside this
sacred well the Æsir had their council hall, to which they galloped
every morning over the rainbow bridge.

But Father Odin, the king of all the Æsir, knew of another fountain more
wonderful still; the two ravens whom he sent forth to bring him news had
told him. This also was below the roots of Yggdrasil, in the spot where
the sky and ocean met. Here for centuries and centuries the giant Mimer
had sat keeping guard over his hidden well, in the bottom of which lay
such a treasure of wisdom as was to be found nowhere else in the world.
Every morning Mimer dipped his glittering horn Giöll into the fountain
and drew out a draught of the wondrous water, which he drank to make him
wise. Every day he grew wiser and wiser; and as this had been going on
ever since the beginning of things, you can scarcely imagine how wise
Mimer was.

Now it did not seem right to Father Odin that a giant should have all
this wisdom to himself; for the giants were the enemies of the Æsir, and
the wisdom which they had been hoarding for ages before the gods were
made was generally used for evil purposes. Moreover, Odin longed and
longed to become the wisest being in the world. So he resolved to win a
draught from Mimer's well, if in any way that could be done.

One night, when the sun had set behind the mountains of Midgard, Odin
put on his broad-brimmed hat and his striped cloak, and taking his
famous staff in his hand, trudged down the long bridge to where it ended
by Mimer's secret grotto.

"Good-day, Mimer," said Odin, entering; "I have come for a drink from
your well."

The giant was sitting with his knees drawn up to his chin, his long
white beard falling over his folded arms, and his head nodding; for
Mimer was very old, and he often fell asleep while watching over his
precious spring. He woke with a frown at Odin's words. "You want a drink
from my well, do you?" he growled. "Hey! I let no one drink from my
well."

"Nevertheless, you must let me have a draught from your glittering
horn," insisted Odin, "and I will pay you for it."

"Oho, you will pay me for it, will you?" echoed Mimer, eyeing his
visitor keenly. For now that he was wide awake, his wisdom taught him
that this was no ordinary stranger. "What will you pay for a drink from
my well, and why do you wish it so much?"

"I can see with my eyes all that goes on in heaven and upon earth,"
said Odin, "but I cannot see into the depths of ocean. I lack the hidden
wisdom of the deep--the wit that lies at the bottom of your fountain. My
ravens tell me many secrets; but I would know all. And as for payment,
ask what you will, and I will pledge anything in return for the draught
of wisdom."

Then Mimer's keen glance grew keener. "You are Odin, of the race of
gods," he cried. "We giants are centuries older than you, and our wisdom
which we have treasured during these ages, when we were the only
creatures in all space, is a precious thing. If I grant you a draught
from my well, you will become as one of us, a wise and dangerous enemy.
It is a goodly price, Odin, which I shall demand for a boon so great."

Now Odin was growing impatient for the sparkling water. "Ask your
price," he frowned. "I have promised that I will pay."

"What say you, then, to leaving one of those far-seeing eyes of yours at
the bottom of my well?" asked Mimer, hoping that he would refuse the
bargain. "This is the only payment I will take."

Odin hesitated. It was indeed a heavy price, and one that he could ill
afford, for he was proud of his noble beauty. But he glanced at the
magic fountain bubbling mysteriously in the shadow, and he knew that he
must have the draught.

"Give me the glittering horn," he answered. "I pledge you my eye for a
draught to the brim."

Very unwillingly Mimer filled the horn from the fountain of wisdom and
handed it to Odin. "Drink, then," he said; "drink and grow wise. This
hour is the beginning of trouble between your race and mine." And wise
Mimer foretold the truth.

Odin thought merely of the wisdom which was to be his. He seized the
horn eagerly, and emptied it without delay. From that moment he became
wiser than anyone else in the world except Mimer himself.

Now he had the price to pay, which was not so pleasant. When he went
away from the grotto, he left at the bottom of the dark pool one of his
fiery eyes, which twinkled and winked up through the magic depths like
the reflection of a star. This is how Odin lost his eye, and why from
that day he was careful to pull his gray hat low over his face when he
wanted to pass unnoticed. For by this oddity folk could easily recognise
the wise lord of Asgard.

In the bright morning, when the sun rose over the mountains of Midgard,
old Mimer drank from his bubbly well a draught of the wise water that
flowed over Odin's pledge. Doing so, from his underground grotto he saw
all that befell in heaven and on earth. So that he also was wiser by the
bargain. Mimer seemed to have secured rather the best of it; for he lost
nothing that he could not spare, while Odin lost what no man can well
part with--one of the good windows wherethrough his heart looks out upon
the world. But there was a sequel to these doings which made the balance
swing down in Odin's favour.

Not long after this, the Æsir quarrelled with the Vanir, wild enemies of
theirs, and there was a terrible battle. But in the end the two sides
made peace; and to prove that they meant never to quarrel again, they
exchanged hostages. The Vanir gave to the Æsir old Niörd the rich, the
lord of the sea and the ocean wind, with his two children, Frey and
Freia. This was indeed a gracious gift; for Freia was the most beautiful
maid in the world, and her twin brother was almost as fair. To the
Vanir in return Father Odin gave his own brother Hœnir. And with
Hœnir he sent Mimer the wise, whom he took from his lonely well.

Now the Vanir made Hœnir their chief, thinking that he must be very
wise because he was the brother of great Odin, who had lately become
famous for his wisdom. They did not know the secret of Mimer's well, how
the hoary old giant was far more wise than anyone who had not quaffed of
the magic water. It is true that in the assemblies of the Vanir Hœnir
gave excellent counsel. But this was because Mimer whispered in
Hœnir's ear all the wisdom that he uttered. Witless Hœnir was
quite helpless without his aid, and did not know what to do or say.
Whenever Mimer was absent he would look nervous and frightened, and if
folk questioned him he always answered:

"Yes, ah yes! Now go and consult someone else."

Of course the Vanir soon grew very angry at such silly answers from
their chief, and presently they began to suspect the truth. "Odin has
deceived us," they said. "He has sent us his foolish brother with a
witch to tell him what to say. Ha! We will show him that we understand
the trick." So they cut off poor old Mimer's head and sent it to Odin as
a present.

The tales do not say what Odin thought of the gift. Perhaps he was glad
that now there was no one in the whole world who could be called so wise
as himself. Perhaps he was sorry for the danger into which he had thrust
a poor old giant who had never done him any wrong, except to be a giant
of the race which the Æsir hated. Perhaps he was a little ashamed of the
trick which he had played the Vanir. Odin's new wisdom showed him how
to prepare Mimer's head with herbs and charms, so that it stood up by
itself quite naturally and seemed not dead. Thenceforth Odin kept it
near him, and learned from it many useful secrets which it had not
forgotten.

So in the end Odin fared better than the unhappy Mimer, whose worst
fault was that he knew more than most folk. That is a dangerous fault,
as others have found; though it is not one for which many of us need
fear being punished.




CHAPTER XIII

THE QUEST OF THE HAMMER


One morning Thor the Thunderer awoke with a yawn, and stretching out his
knotted arm, felt for his precious hammer, which he kept always under
his pillow of clouds. But he started up with a roar of rage, so that all
the palace trembled. The hammer was gone!

Now this was a very serious matter, for Thor was the protector of
Asgard, and Miölnir, the magic hammer which the dwarf had made, was his
mighty weapon, of which the enemies of the Æsir stood so much in dread
that they dared not venture near. But if they should learn that Miölnir
was gone, who could tell what danger might not threaten the palaces of
heaven?

Thor darted his flashing eye into every corner of Cloud Land in search
of the hammer. He called his fair wife, Sif of the golden hair, to aid
in the search, and his two lovely daughters, Thrude and Lora. They
hunted and they hunted; they turned Thrudheim upside down, and set the
clouds to rolling wonderfully, as they peeped and pried behind and
around and under each billowy mass. But Miölnir was not to be found.
Certainly, someone had stolen it.

Thor's yellow beard quivered with rage, and his hair bristled on end
like the golden rays of a star, while all his household trembled.

"It is Loki again!" he cried. "I am sure Loki is at the bottom of this
mischief!" For since the time when Thor had captured Loki for the dwarf
Brock and had given him over to have his bragging lips sewed up, Loki
had looked at him with evil eyes; and Thor knew that the red rascal
hated him most of all the gods.

But this time Thor was mistaken. It was not Loki who had stolen the
hammer--he was too great a coward for that. And though he meant, before
the end, to be revenged upon Thor, he was waiting until a safe chance
should come, when Thor himself might stumble into danger, and Loki need
only to help the evil by a malicious word or two; and this chance came
later, as you shall hear in another tale.

Meanwhile Loki was on his best behaviour, trying to appear very kind and
obliging; so when Thor came rumbling and roaring up to him, demanding,
"What have you done with my hammer, you thief?" Loki looked surprised,
but did not lose his temper nor answer rudely.

"Have you indeed missed your hammer, brother Thor?" he said, mumbling,
for his mouth was still sore where Brock had sewed the stitches. "That
is a pity; for if the giants hear of this, they will be coming to try
their might against Asgard."

"Hush!" muttered Thor, grasping him by the shoulder with his iron
fingers. "That is what I fear. But look you, Loki: I suspect your hand
in the mischief. Come, confess."

Then Loki protested that he had nothing to do with so wicked a deed.
"But," he added wheedlingly, "I think I can guess the thief; and because
I love you, Thor, I will help you to find him."

"Humph!" growled Thor. "Much love you bear to me! However, you are a
wise rascal, the nimblest wit of all the Æsir, and it is better to have
you on my side than on the other, when giants are in the game. Tell me,
then: who has robbed the Thunder Lord of his bolt of power?"

Loki drew near and whispered in Thor's ear. "Look, how the storms rage
and the winds howl in the world below! Someone is wielding your thunder
hammer all unskilfully. Can you not guess the thief? Who but Thrym, the
mighty giant who has ever been your enemy and your imitator, and whose
fingers have long itched to grasp the short handle of mighty Miölnir,
that the world may name him Thunder Lord instead of you. But look! What
a tempest! The world will be shattered into fragments unless we soon get
the hammer back."

Then Thor roared with rage. "I will seek this impudent Thrym!" he cried.
"I will crush him into bits, and teach him to meddle with the weapon of
the Æsir!"

"Softly, softly," said Loki, smiling maliciously. "He is a shrewd giant,
and a mighty. Even you, great Thor, cannot go to him and pluck the
hammer from his hand as one would slip the rattle from a baby's pink
fist. Nay, you must use craft, Thor; and it is I who will teach you, if
you will be patient."

Thor was a brave, blunt fellow, and he hated the ways of Loki, his lies
and his deceit. He liked best the way of warriors--the thundering
charge, the flash of weapons, and the heavy blow; but without the hammer
he could not fight the giants hand to hand. Loki's advice seemed wise,
and he decided to leave the matter to the Red One.

Loki was now all eagerness, for he loved difficulties which would set
his wit in play and bring other folk into danger. "Look, now," he said.
"We must go to Freia and borrow her falcon dress. But you must ask; for
she loves me so little that she would scarce listen to me."

So first they made their way to Folkvang, the house of maidens, where
Freia dwelt, the loveliest of all in Asgard. She was fairer than fair,
and sweeter than sweet, and the tears from her flower eyes made the dew
which blessed the earth flowers night and morning. Of her Thor borrowed
the magic dress of feathers in which Freia was wont to clothe herself
and flit like a great beautiful bird all about the world. She was
willing enough to lend it to Thor when he told her that by its aid he
hoped to win back the hammer which he had lost; for she well knew the
danger threatening herself and all the Æsir until Miölnir should be
found.

"Now will I fetch the hammer for you," said Loki. So he put on the
falcon plumage, and, spreading his brown wings, flapped away up, up,
over the world, down, down, across the great ocean which lies beyond all
things that men know. And he came to the dark country where there was no
sunshine nor spring, but it was always dreary winter; where mountains
were piled up like blocks of ice, and where great caverns yawned
hungrily in blackness. And this was Jotunheim, the land of the Frost
Giants.

And lo! when Loki came thereto he found Thrym the Giant King sitting
outside his palace cave, playing with his dogs and horses. The dogs were
as big as elephants, and the horses were as big as houses, but Thrym
himself was as huge as a mountain; and Loki trembled, but he tried to
seem brave.

"Good-day, Loki," said Thrym, with the terrible voice of which he was so
proud, for he fancied it was as loud as Thor's. "How fares it,
feathered one, with your little brothers, the Æsir, in Asgard halls? And
how dare you venture alone in this guise to Giant Land?"

"It is an ill day in Asgard," sighed Loki, keeping his eye warily upon
the giant, "and a stormy one in the world of men, I heard the winds
howling and the storms rushing on the earth as I passed by. Some mighty
one has stolen the hammer of our Thor. Is it you, Thrym, greatest of all
giants--greater than Thor himself?"

This the crafty one said to flatter Thrym, for Loki well knew the
weakness of those who love to be thought greater than they are.

Then Thrym bridled and swelled with pride, and tried to put on the
majesty and awe of noble Thor; but he only succeeded in becoming an
ugly, puffy monster.

"Well, yes," he admitted. "I have the hammer that belonged to your
little Thor; and now how much of & lord is he?"

"Alack!" sighed Loki again, "weak enough he is without his magic weapon.
But you, O Thrym--surely your mightiness needs no such aid. Give me the
hammer, that Asgard may no longer be shaken by Thor's grief for his
precious toy."

But Thrym was not so easily to be flattered into parting with his stolen
treasure. He grinned a dreadful grin, several yards in width, which his
teeth barred like jagged boulders across the entrance to a mountain
cavern,

"Miölnir the hammer is mine," he said, "and I am Thunder Lord, mightiest
of the mighty. I have hidden it where Thor can never find it, twelve
leagues below the sea caves, where Queen Ran lives with her daughters,
the white-capped Waves. But listen, Loki. Go tell the Æsir that I will
give back Thor's hammer. I will give it back upon one condition--that
they send Freia the beautiful to be my wife."

"Freia the beautiful!" Loki had to stifle a laugh. Fancy the Æsir giving
their fairest flower to such an ugly fellow as this! But he only said
politely, "Ah, yes; you demand our Freia in exchange for the little
hammer? It is a costly price, great Thrym. But I will be your friend in
Asgard. If I have my way, you shall soon see the fairest bride in all
the world knocking at your door. Farewell!"

So Loki whizzed back to Asgard on his falcon wings; and as he went he
chuckled to think of the evils which were likely to happen because of
his words with Thrym. First he gave the message to Thor--not sparing of
Thrym's insolence, to make Thor angry; and then he went to Freia with
the word for her--not sparing of Thrym's ugliness, to make her shudder.
The spiteful fellow!

Now you can imagine the horror that was in Asgard as the Æsir listened
to Loki's words. "My hammer!" roared Thor. "The villain confesses that
he has stolen my hammer, and boasts that he is Thunder Lord! Gr-r-r!"

"The ugly giant!" wailed Freia. "Must I be the bride of that hideous old
monster, and live in his gloomy mountain prison all my life?"

"Yes; put on your bridal veil, sweet Freia," said Loki maliciously, "and
come with me to Jotunheim. Hang your famous starry necklace about your
neck, and don your bravest robe; for in eight days there will be a
wedding, and Thor's hammer is to pay."

Then Freia fell to weeping. "I cannot go! I will not go!" she cried. "I
will not leave the home of gladness and Father Odin's table to dwell in
the land of horrors! Thor's hammer is mighty, but mightier the love of
the kind Æsir for their little Freia! Good Odin, dear brother Frey,
speak for me! You will not make me go?"

The Asir looked at her and thought how lonely and bare would Asgard be
without her loveliness; for she was fairer than fair, and sweeter than
sweet.

"She shall not go!" shouted Frey, putting his arms about his sister's
neck.

"No, she shall not go!" cried all the Asir with one voice.

"But my hammer," insisted Thor. "I must have Miölnir back again."

"And my word to Thrym," said Loki, "that must be made good."

"You are too generous with your words," said Odin sternly, for he knew
his brother well. "Your word is not a gem of great price, for you have
made it cheap."

Then spoke Heimdal, the sleepless watchman who sits on guard at the
entrance to the rainbow bridge which leads to Asgard; and Heimdal was
the wisest of the Æsir, for he could see into the future, and knew how
things would come to pass. Through his golden teeth he spoke, for his
teeth were all of gold.

"I have a plan," he said. "Let us dress Thor himself like a bride in
Freia's robes, and send him to Jotunheim to talk with Thrym and to win
back his hammer."

But at this word Thor grew very angry. "What! dress me like a girl!" he
roared. "I should never hear the last of it! The Asir will mock me, and
call me 'maiden'! The giants, and even the puny dwarfs, will have a
lasting jest upon me! I will not go! I will fight! I will die, if need
be! But dressed as a woman I will not go!"

But Loki answered him with sharp words, for this was a scheme after his
own heart. "What, Thor!" he said. "Would you lose your hammer and keep
Asgard in danger for so small a whim. Look, now: if you go not, Thrym
with his giants will come in a mighty army and drive us from Asgard;
then he will indeed make Freia his bride, and, moreover, he will have
you for his slave under the power of his hammer. How like you this
picture, brother of the thunder? Nay, Heimdal's plan is a good one, and
I myself will help to carry it out."

Still Thor hesitated; but Freia came and laid her white hand on his arm,
and looked up into his scowling face pleadingly.

"To save me, Thor," she begged. And Thor said he would go.

Then there was great sport among the Æsir, while they dressed Thor like
a beautiful maiden. Brunhilde and her sisters, the nine Valkyrie,
daughters of Odin, had the task in hand. How they laughed as they
brushed and curled his yellow hair, and set upon it the wondrous
headdress of silk and pearls! They let out seams, and they let down
hems, and set on extra pieces, to make it larger, and so they hid his
great limbs and knotted arms under Freia's fairest robe of scarlet; but
beneath it all he would wear his shirt of mail and his belt of power
that gave him double strength. Freia herself twisted about his neck her
famous necklace of starry jewels, and Queen Frigg, his mother, hung at
his girdle a jingling bunch of keys, such as was the custom for the
bride to wear at Norse weddings. Last of all, that Thrym might not see
Thor's fierce eyes and the yellow beard, that ill became a maiden, they
threw over him a long veil of silver white which covered him to the
feet. And there he stood, as stately and tall a bride as even a giant
might wish to see; but on his hands he wore his iron gloves, and they
ached for but one thing--to grasp the handle of the stolen hammer.

"Ah, what a lovely maid it is!" chuckled Loki; "and how glad will Thrym
be to see this Freia come! Bride Thor, I will go with you as your
handmaiden, for I would fain see the fun."

"Come, then," said Thor sulkily, for he was ill pleased, and wore his
maiden robes with no good grace. "It is fitting that you go; for I like
not these lies and masking and I may spoil the mummery without you at my
elbow."

There was loud laughter above the clouds when Thor, all veiled and
dainty seeming, drove away from Asgard to his wedding, with maid Loki by
his side. Thor cracked his whip and chirruped fiercely to his twin goats
with golden hoofs, for he wanted to escape the sounds of mirth that
echoed from the rainbow bridge, where all the Æsir stood watching. Loki,
sitting with his hands meekly folded like a girl, chuckled as he glanced
up at Thor's angry face; but he said nothing, for he knew it was not
good to joke too far with Thor, even when Milönir was hidden twelve
leagues below the sea in Ran's kingdom.

So off they dashed to Jotunheim, where Thrym was waiting and longing for
his beautiful bride. Thor's goats thundered along above the sea and land
and people far below, who looked up wondering as the noise rolled
overhead. "Hear how the thunder rumbles!" they said. "Thor is on a long
journey to-night." And a long journey it was, as the tired goats found
before they reached the end.

Thrym heard the sound of their approach, for his ear was eager. "Hola!"
he cried. "Someone is coming from Asgard--only one of Odin's children
could make a din so fearful. Hasten, men, and see if they are bringing
Freia to be my wife."

Then the lookout giant stepped down from the top of his mountain, and
said that a chariot was bringing two maidens to the door.

"Run, giants, run!" shouted Thrym, in a fever at this news. "My bride is
coming! Put silken cushions on the benches for a great banquet, and make
the house beautiful for the fairest maid in all space! Bring in all my
golden-horned cows and my coal-black oxen, that she may see how rich I
am, and heap all my gold and jewels about to dazzle her sweet eyes! She
shall find me richest of the rich; and when I have her--fairest of the
fair--there will be no treasure that I lack--not one!"

The chariot stopped at the gate, and out stepped the tall bride, hidden
from head to foot, and her handmaiden muffled to the chin. "How afraid
of catching cold they must be!" whispered the giant ladies, who were
peering over one another's shoulders to catch a glimpse of the bride,
just as the crowd outside the awning does at a wedding nowadays.

Thrym had sent six splendid servants to escort the maidens: these were
the Metal Kings, who served him as lord of them all. There was the Gold
King, all in cloth of gold, with fringes of yellow bullion, most
glittering to see; and there was the Silver King, almost as gorgeous in
a suit of spangled white; and side by side bowed the dark Kings of Iron
and Lead, the one mighty in black, the other sullen in blue; and after
them were the Copper King, gleaming ruddy and brave, and the Tin King,
strutting in his trimmings of gaudy tinsel which looked nearly as well
as silver, but were more economical. And this fine troop of lackey kings
most politely led Thor and Loki into the palace, and gave them of the
best, for they never suspected who these seeming maidens really were.

And when evening came there was a wonderful banquet to celebrate the
wedding. On a golden throne sat Thrym, uglier than ever in his finery of
purple and gold. Beside him was the bride, of whose face no one had yet
caught even a glimpse; and at Thrym's other hand stood Loki, the waiting
maid, for he wanted to be near to mend the mistakes which Thor might
make.

Now the dishes at the feast were served in a huge way, as befitted the
table of giants: great beeves roasted whole, on platters as wide across
as a ship's deck; plum puddings as fat as feather beds, with plums as
big as footballs; and a wedding cake like a snow-capped hay mow. The
giants ate enormously. But to Thor, because they thought him a dainty
maiden, they served small bits of everything on a tiny gold dish. Now
Thor's long journey had made him very hungry, and through his veil he
whispered to Loki, "I shall starve, Loki! I cannot fare on these
nibbles. I must eat a goodly meal as I do at home." And forthwith he
helped himself to such morsels as might satisfy his hunger for a little
time. You should have seen the giants stare at the meal which the dainty
bride devoured!

For first under the silver veil disappeared by pieces a whole roast ox.
Then Thor made eight mouthfuls of eight pink salmon, a dish of which he
was very fond. And next he looked about and reached for a platter of
cakes and sweetmeats that was set aside at one end of the table for the
lady guests, and the bride ate them all. You can fancy how the damsels
drew down their mouths and looked at one another when they saw their
dessert disappear; and they whispered about the table, "Alack! if our
future mistress is to sup like this day by day, there will be poor cheer
for the rest of us!" And to crown it all, Thor was thirsty, as well he
might be; and one after another he raised to his lips and emptied three
great barrels of mead, the foamy drink of the giants. Then indeed Thrym
was amazed, for Thor's giant appetite had beaten that of the giants
themselves.

"Never before saw I a bride so hungry," he cried. "And never before one
half so thirsty!"

But Loki, the waiting maid, whispered to him softly, "The truth is,
great Thrym, that my dear mistress was almost starved. For eight days
Freia has eaten nothing at all, so eager was she for Jotunheim."

Then Thrym was delighted, you may be sure. He forgave his hungry bride,
and loved her with all his heart. He leaned forward to give her a kiss,
raising a corner of her veil; but his hand dropped suddenly, and he
started up in terror, for he had caught the angry flash of Thor's eye,
which was glaring at him through the bridal veil. Thor was longing for
his hammer.

"Why has Freia so sharp a look?" Thrym cried. "It pierces like lightning
and burns like fire."

But again the sly waiting maid whispered timidly, "Oh, Thrym, be not
amazed! The truth is, my poor mistress's eyes are red with wakefulness
and bright with longing. For eight nights Freia has not known a wink of
sleep, so eager was she for Jotunheim."

Then again Thrym was doubly delighted, and he longed to call her his
very own dear wife. "Bring in the wedding gift!" he cried. "Bring in
Thor's hammer, Miölnir, and give it to Freia, as I promised; for when I
have kept my word she will be mine--all mine!"

Then Thor's big heart laughed under his woman's dress, and his fierce
eyes swept eagerly down the hall to meet the servant who was bringing in
the hammer on a velvet cushion. Thor's fingers could hardly wait to
clutch the stubby handle which they knew so well; but he sat quite still
on the throne beside ugly old Thrym, with his hands meekly folded and
his head bowed like a bashful bride.

The giant servant drew nearer, nearer, puffing and blowing, strong
though he was, beneath the mighty weight. He was about to lay it at
Thor's feet (for he thought it so heavy that no maiden could lift it or
hold it in her lap), when suddenly Thor's heart swelled, and he gave a
most unmaidenly shout of rage and triumph. With one swoop he grasped the
hammer in his iron fingers; with the other arm he tore off the veil that
hid his terrible face, and trampled it under foot; then he turned to the
frightened king, who cowered beside him on the throne.

"Thief!" he cried. "Freia sends you _this_ as a wedding gift!" And he
whirled the hammer about his head, then hurled it once, twice, thrice,
as it rebounded to his hand; and in the first stroke, as of lightning,
Thrym rolled dead from his throne; in the second stroke perished the
whole giant household--these ugly enemies of the Æsir; and in the third
stroke the palace itself tumbled together and fell to the ground like a
toppling playhouse of blocks.

But Loki and Thor stood safely among the ruins, dressed in their
tattered maiden robes, a quaint and curious sight; and Loki, full of
mischief now as ever, burst out laughing.

"Oh, Thor! if you could see--" he began; but Thor held up his hammer and
shook it gently as he said:

"Look now, Loki: it was an excellent joke, and so far you have done
well--after your crafty fashion, which likes me not. But now I have my
hammer again, and the joke is done. From you, nor from another, I brook
no laughter at my expense. Henceforth we will have no mention of this
masquerade, nor of these rags which now I throw away. Do you hear, red
laughter?"

And Loki heard, with a look of hate, and stifled his laughter as best he
could; for it is not good to laugh at him who holds the hammer.

Not once after that was there mention in Asgard of the time when Thor
dressed him as a girl and won his bridal gift from Thrym the giant.

But Miölnir was safe once more in Asgard, and you and I know how it came
there; so someone must have told. I wonder if red Loki whispered the
tale to some outsider, after all? Perhaps it may be so, for now he knew
how best to make Thor angry; and from that day when Thor forbade his
laughing, Loki hated him with the mean little hatred of a mean little
soul.




CHAPTER XIV

THE APPLES OF IDUN


Once upon a time Odin, Loki, and Hœner started on a journey. They had
often travelled together before on all sorts of errands, for they had a
great many things to look after, and more than once they had fallen into
trouble through the prying, meddlesome, malicious spirit of Loke, who
was never so happy as when he was doing wrong. When the gods went on a
journey they travelled fast and hard, for they were strong, active
spirits who loved nothing so much as hard work, hard blows, storm,
peril, and struggle. There were no roads through the country over which
they made their way, only high mountains to be climbed by rocky paths,
deep valleys into which the sun hardly looked during half the year, and
swift-rushing streams, cold as ice, and treacherous to the surest foot
and the strongest arm. Not a bird flew through the air, not an animal
sprang through the trees. It was as still as a desert. The gods walked
on and on, getting more tired and hungry at every step. The sun was
sinking low over the steep, pine-crested mountains, and the travellers
had neither breakfasted nor dined. Even Odin was beginning to feel the
pangs of hunger, like the most ordinary mortal, when suddenly, entering
a little valley, the famished gods came upon a herd of cattle. It was
the work of a minute to kill a great ox and to have the carcass
swinging in a huge pot over a roaring fire.

But never were gods so unlucky before! In spite of their hunger, the pot
would not boil. They piled on the wood until the great flames crackled
and licked the pot with their fiery tongues, but every time the cover
was lifted there was the meat just as raw as when it was put in. It is
easy to imagine that the travellers were not in very good humour. As
they were talking about it, and wondering how it could be, a voice
called out from the branches of the oak overhead, "If you will give me
my fill, I'll make the pot boil."

The gods looked first at each other and then into the tree, and there
they discovered a great eagle. They were glad enough to get their supper
on almost any terms, so they told the eagle he might have what he wanted
if he would only get the meat cooked. The bird was as good as his word,
and in less time than it takes to tell it supper was ready. Then the
eagle flew down and picked out both shoulders and both legs. This was a
pretty large share, it must be confessed, and Loki, who was always angry
when anybody got more than he, no sooner saw what the eagle had taken,
than he seized a great pole and began to beat the rapacious bird
unmercifully. Whereupon a very singular thing happened, as singular
things always used to happen when the gods were concerned: the pole
stuck fast in the huge talons of the eagle at one end, and Loki stuck
fast at the other end. Struggle as he might, he could not get loose, and
as the great bird sailed away over the tops of the trees, Loki went
pounding along on the ground, striking against rocks and branches until
he was bruised half to death.

The eagle was not an ordinary bird by any means, as Loki soon found
when he begged for mercy. The giant Thjasse happened to be flying abroad
in his eagle plumage when the hungry travellers came under the oak and
tried to cook the ox. It was into his hands that Loki had fallen, and he
was not to get away until he had promised to pay roundly for his
freedom.

If there was one thing which the gods prized above their other treasures
in Asgard, it was the beautiful fruit of Idun, kept by the goddess in a
golden casket and given to the gods to keep them forever young and fair.
Without these Apples all their power could not have kept them from
getting old like the meanest of mortals. Without these Apples of Idun,
Asgard itself would have lost its charm; for what would heaven be
without youth and beauty forever shining through it?

Thjasse told Loki that he could not go unless he would promise to bring
him the Apples of Idun. Loki was wicked enough for anything; but when it
came to robbing the gods of their immortality, even he hesitated. And
while he hesitated the eagle dashed hither and thither, flinging him
against the sides of the mountains and dragging him through the great
tough boughs of the oaks until his courage gave out entirely, and he
promised to steal the Apples out of Asgard and give them to the giant.

Loki was bruised and sore enough when he got on his feet again to hate
the giant who handled him so roughly, with all his heart, but he was not
unwilling to keep his promise to steal the Apples, if only for the sake
of tormenting the other gods. But how was it to be done? Idun guarded
the golden fruit of immortality with sleepless watchfulness. No one ever
touched it but herself, and a beautiful sight it was to see her fair
hands spread it forth for the morning feasts in Asgard. The power which
Loki possessed lay not so much in his own strength, although he had a
smooth way of deceiving people, as in the goodness of others who had no
thought of his doing wrong because they never did wrong themselves.

Not long after all this happened, Loki came carelessly up to Idun as she
was gathering her Apples to put them away in the beautiful carven box
which held them.

"Good-morning, goddess," said he. "How fair and golden your Apples are!"

"Yes," answered Idun; "the bloom of youth keeps them always beautiful."

"I never saw anything like them," continued Loki slowly, as if he were
talking about a matter of no importance, "until the other day."

Idun looked up at once with the greatest interest and curiosity in her
face. She was very proud of her Apples, and she knew no earthly trees,
however large and fair, bore the immortal fruit.

"Where have you seen any Apples like them?" she asked.

"Oh, just outside the gates," said Loki indifferently. "If you care to
see them I'll take you there. It will keep you but a moment. The tree is
only a little way off."

Idun was anxious to go at once.

"Better take your Apples with you, to compare them with the others,"
said the wily god, as she prepared to go.

Idun gathered up the golden Apples and went out of Asgard, carrying with
her all that made it heaven. No sooner was she beyond the gates than a
mighty rushing sound was heard, like the coming of a tempest, and before
she could think or act, the giant Thjasse, in his eagle plumage, was
bearing her swiftly away through the air to his desolate, icy home in
Thrymheim, where, after vainly trying to persuade her to let him eat the
Apples and be forever young like the gods, he kept her a lonely
prisoner.

Loki, after keeping his promise and delivering Idun into the hands of
the giant, strayed back into Asgard as if nothing had happened. The next
morning, when the gods assembled for their feast, there was no Idun. Day
after day went past, and still the beautiful goddess did not come.
Little by little the light of youth and beauty faded from the home of
the gods, and they themselves became old and haggard. Their strong,
young faces were lined with care and furrowed by age, their raven locks
passed from gray to white, and their flashing eyes became dim and
hollow. Brage, the god of poetry, could make no music while his
beautiful wife was gone he knew not whither.

Morning after morning the faded light broke on paler and ever paler
faces, until even in heaven the eternal light of youth seemed to be
going out forever.

Finally the gods could bear the loss of power and joy no longer. They
made rigorous inquiry. They tracked Loki on that fair morning when he
led Idun beyond the gates; they seized him and brought him into solemn
council, and when he read in their haggard faces the deadly hate which
flamed in all their hearts against his treachery, his courage failed,
and he promised to bring Idun back to Asgard if the goddess Freyja would
lend him her falcon guise. No sooner said than done; and with eager gaze
the gods watched him as he flew away, becoming at last only a dark
moving speck against the sky.

After long and weary flight Loki came to Thrymheim, and was glad enough
to find Thjasse gone to sea and Idun alone in his dreary house. He
changed her instantly into a nut, and taking her thus disguised in his
talons, flew away as fast as his falcon wings could carry him. And he
had need of all his speed, for Thjasse, coming suddenly home and finding
Idun and her precious fruit gone, guessed what had happened, and,
putting on his eagle plumage, flew forth in a mighty rage, with
vengeance in his heart. Like the rushing wings of a tempest, his mighty
pinions beat the air and bore him swiftly onward. From mountain peak to
mountain peak he measured his wide course, almost grazing at times the
murmuring pine forests, and then sweeping high in mid-air with nothing
above but the arching sky, and nothing beneath but the tossing sea.

At last he sees the falcon far ahead, and now his flight becomes like
the flash of the lightning for swiftness, and like the rushing of clouds
for uproar. The haggard faces of the gods line the walls of Asgard and
watch the race with tremulous eagerness. Youth and immortality are
staked upon the winning of Loki. He is weary enough and frightened
enough, too, as the eagle sweeps on close behind him; but he makes
desperate efforts to widen the distance between them. Little by little
the eagle gains on the falcon. The gods grow white with fear; they rush
off and prepare great fires upon the walls. With fainting, drooping wing
the falcon passes over and drops exhausted by the wall. In an instant
the fires have been lighted, and the great flames roar to heaven. The
eagle sweeps across the fiery line a second later, and falls, maimed and
burned, to the ground, where a dozen fierce hands smite the life out of
him, and the great giant Thjasse perishes among his foes.

Idun resumes her natural form as Brage rushes to meet her. The gods
crowd round her. She spreads the feast, the golden Apples gleaming with
unspeakable lustre in the eyes of the gods. They eat; and once more
their faces glow with the beauty of immortal youth, their eyes flash
with the radiance of divine power, and, while Idun stands like a star
for beauty among the throng, the song of Brage is heard once more; for
poetry and immortality are wedded again.





CHAPTER XV

THE DEATH OF BALDER


There was one shadow which always fell over Asgard. Sometimes in the
long years the gods almost forgot it, it lay so far off, like a dim
cloud in a clear sky; but Odin saw it deepen and widen as he looked out
into the universe, and he knew that the last great battle would surely
come, when the gods themselves would be destroyed and a long twilight
would rest on all the worlds; and now the day was close at hand.
Misfortunes never come singly to men, and they did not to the gods.
Idun, the beautiful goddess of youth, whose apples were the joy of all
Asgard, made a resting place for herself among the massive branches of
Yggdrasil, and there every evening came Brage, and sang so sweetly that
the birds stopped to listen, and even the Norns, those implacable
sisters at the foot of the tree, were softened by the melody. But poetry
cannot change the purposes of fate, and one evening no song was heard of
Brage or birds, the leaves of the world tree hung withered and lifeless
on the branches, and the fountain from which they had daily been
sprinkled was dry at last. Idun had fallen into the dark valley of
death, and when Brage, Heimdal, and Loki went to question her about the
future she could answer them only with tears. Brage would not leave his
beautiful wife alone amid the dim shades that crowded the dreary
valley, and so youth and genius vanished out of Asgard forever.

Balder was the most godlike of all the gods, because he was the purest
and the best. Wherever he went his coming was like the coming of
sunshine, and all the beauty of summer was but the shining of his face.
When men's hearts were white like the light, and their lives clear as
the day, it was because Balder was looking down upon them with those
soft, clear eyes that were open windows to the soul of God. He had
always lived in such a glow of brightness that no darkness had ever
touched him; but one morning, after Idun and Brage had gone, Balder's
face was sad and troubled. He walked slowly from room to room in his
palace Breidablik, stainless as the sky when April showers have swept
across it because no impure thing had ever crossed the threshold, and
his eyes were heavy with sorrow. In the night terrible dreams had broken
his sleep, and made it a long torture. The air seemed to be full of
awful changes for him and for all the gods. He knew in his soul that the
shadow of the last great day was sweeping on; as he looked out and saw
the worlds lying in light and beauty, the fields yellow with waving
grain, the deep fiords flashing back the sunbeams from their clear
depths, the verdure clothing the loftiest mountains, and knew that over
all this darkness and desolation would come, with silence of reapers and
birds, with fading of leaf and flower, a great sorrow fell on his heart.

Balder could bear the burden no longer. He went out, called all the gods
together, and told them the terrible dreams of the night. Every face was
heavy with care. The death of Balder would be like the going out of the
sun, and after a long, sad council the gods resolved to protect him
from harm by pledging all things to stand between him and any hurt. So
Frigg, his mother, went forth and made everything promise, on a solemn
oath, not to injure her son. Fire, iron, all kinds of metal, every sort
of stone, trees, earth, diseases, birds, beasts, snakes, as the anxious
mother went to them, solemnly pledged themselves that no harm should
come near Balder. Everything promised, and Frigg thought she had driven
away the cloud; but fate was stronger than her love, and one little
shrub had not sworn.

Odin was not satisfied even with these precautions, for whichever way he
looked the shadow of a great sorrow spread over the worlds. He began to
feel as if he were no longer the greatest of the gods, and he could
almost hear the rough shouts of the frost giants crowding the rainbow
bridge on their way into Asgard. When trouble comes to men it is hard to
bear, but to a god who had so many worlds to guide and rule it was a new
and terrible thing. Odin thought and thought until he was weary, but no
gleam of light could he find anywhere; it was thick darkness everywhere.

At last he could bear the suspense no longer, and saddling his horse he
rode sadly out of Asgard to Niflheim, the home of Hel, whose face was as
the face of death itself. As he drew near the gates, a monstrous dog
came out and barked furiously, but Odin rode a little eastward of the
shadowy gates to the grave of a wonderful prophetess. It was a cold,
gloomy place, and the soul of the great god was pierced with a feeling
of hopeless sorrow as he dismounted from Sleipner, and bending over the
grave began to chant weird songs, and weave magical charms over it. When
he had spoken those wonderful words which could waken the dead from
their sleep, there was an awful silence for a moment, and then a faint
ghost-like voice came from the grave.

"Who art thou?" it said. "Who breaketh the silence of death, and calleth
the sleeper out of her long slumbers? Ages ago I was laid at rest here,
snow and rain have fallen upon me through myriad years; why dost thou
disturb me?"

"I am Vegtam," answered Odin, "and I come to ask why the couches of Hel
are hung with gold and the benches strewn with shining rings?"

"It is done for Balder," answered the awful voice; "ask me no more."

Odin's heart sank when he heard these words; but he was determined to
know the worst.

"I will ask thee until I know all. Who shall strike the fatal blow?"

"If I must, I must," moaned the prophetess. "Hoder shall smite his
brother Balder and send him down to the dark home of Hel. The mead is
already brewed for Balder, and the despair draweth near."

Then Odin, looking into the future across the open grave, saw all the
days to come.

"Who is this," he said, seeing that which no mortal could have seen;
"who is this that will not weep for Balder?"

Then the prophetess knew that it was none other than the greatest of the
gods who had called her up.

"Thou art not Vegtam," she exclaimed, "thou art Odin himself, the king
of men."

"And thou," answered Odin angrily, "art no prophetess, but the mother of
three giants."

"Ride home, then, and exult in what thou hast discovered," said the dead
woman. "Never shall my slumbers be broken again until Loki shall burst
his chains and the great battle come."

And Odin rode sadly homeward knowing that already Niflheim was making
itself beautiful against the coming of Balder.

The other gods meanwhile had become merry again; for had not everything
promised to protect their beloved Balder? They even made sport of that
which troubled them, for when they found that nothing could hurt Balder,
and that all things glanced aside from his shining form, they persuaded
him to stand as a target for their weapons; hurling darts, spears,
swords, and battle-axes at him, all of which went singing through the
air and fell harmless at his feet. But Loki, when he saw these sports,
was jealous of Balder, and went about thinking how he could destroy him.

It happened that as Frigg sat spinning in her house Fensal, the soft
wind blowing in at the windows and bringing the merry shouts of the gods
at play, an old woman entered and approached her.

"Do you know," asked the newcomer, "what they are doing in Asgard? They
are throwing all manner of dangerous weapons at Balder. He stands there
like the sun for brightness, and against his glory, spears and
battle-axes fall powerless to the ground. Nothing can harm him."

"No," answered Frigg joyfully; "nothing can bring him any hurt, for I
have made everything in heaven and earth swear to protect him."

"What!" said the old woman, "has everything sworn to guard Balder?"

"Yes," said Frigg, "everything has sworn except one little shrub which
is called Mistletoe, and grows on the eastern side of Valhal. I did not
take an oath from that because I thought it too young and weak."

When the old woman heard this a strange light came into her eyes; she
walked off much faster than she had come in, and no sooner had she
passed beyond Frigg's sight than this same feeble old woman grew
suddenly erect, shook off her woman's garments, and there stood Loki
himself. In a moment he had reached the slope east of Valhal, had
plucked a twig of the unsworn Mistletoe, and was back in the circle of
the gods, who were still at their favourite pastime with Balder. Hoder
was standing silent and alone outside the noisy throng, for he was
blind. Loki touched him.

"Why do you not throw something at Balder?"

"Because I cannot see where Balder stands, and have nothing to throw if
I could," replied Hoder.

"If that is all," said Loki, "come with me. I will give you something to
throw, and direct your aim."

Hoder, thinking no evil, went with Loki and did as he was told.

The little sprig of Mistletoe shot through the air, pierced the heart of
Balder, and in a moment the beautiful god lay dead upon the field. A
shadow rose out of the deep beyond the worlds and spread itself over
heaven and earth, for the light of the universe had gone out.

The gods could not speak for horror. They stood like statues for a
moment, and then a hopeless wail burst from their lips. Tears fell like
rain from eyes that had never wept before, for Balder, the joy of
Asgard, had gone to Niflheim and left them desolate. But Odin was
saddest of all, because he knew the future, and he knew that peace and
light had fled from Asgard forever, and that the last day and the long
night were hurrying on.

Frigg could not give up her beautiful son, and when her grief had spent
itself a little, she asked who would go to Hel and offer her a rich
ransom if she would permit Balder to return to Asgard.

"I will go," said Hermod; swift at the word of Odin Sleipner was led
forth, and in an instant Hermod was galloping furiously away.

Then the gods began with sorrowful hearts to make ready for Balder's
funeral. When the once beautiful form had been arrayed in grave clothes
they carried it reverently down to the deep sea, which lay, calm as a
summer afternoon, waiting for its precious burden. Close to the water's
edge lay Balder's Ringhorn, the greatest of all the ships that sailed
the seas, but when the gods tried to launch it they could not move it an
inch. The great vessel creaked and groaned, out no one could push it
down to the water. Odin walked about it with a sad face, and the gentle
ripple of the little waves chasing each other over the rocks seemed a
mocking laugh to him.

"Send to Jotunheim for Hyrroken," he said at last; and a messenger was
soon flying for that mighty giantess.

In a little time, Hyrroken came riding swiftly on a wolf so large and
fierce that he made the gods think of Fenrer. When the giantess had
alighted, Odin ordered four Berserkers of mighty strength to hold the
wolf, but he struggled so angrily that they had to throw him on the
ground before they could control him. Then Hyrroken went to the prow of
the ship and with one mighty effort sent it far into the sea, the
rollers underneath bursting into flame, and the whole earth trembling
with the shock. Thor was so angry at the uproar that he would have
killed the giantess on the spot if he had not been held back by the
other gods. The great ship floated on the sea as she had often done
before, when Balder, full of life and beauty, set all her sails and was
borne joyfully across the tossing seas. Slowly and solemnly the dead god
was carried on board, and as Nanna, his faithful wife, saw her husband
borne for the last time from the earth which he had made dear to her and
beautiful to all men, her heart broke with sorrow, and they laid her
beside Balder on the funeral pyre.

Since the world began no one had seen such a funeral. No bells tolled,
no long procession of mourners moved across the hills, but all the
worlds lay under a deep shadow, and from every quarter came those who
had loved or feared Balder. There at the very water's edge stood Odin
himself, the ravens flying about his head, and on his majestic face a
gloom that no sun would ever lighten again; and there was Frigg, the
desolate mother whose son had already gone so far that he would never
come back to her; there was Frey standing sad and stern in his chariot;
there was Freyja, the goddess of love, from whose eyes fell a shining
rain of tears; there, too, was Heimdal on his horse Goldtop; and around
all these glorious ones from Asgard crowded the children of Jotunheim,
grim mountain giants seamed with scars from Thor's hammer, and frost
giants who saw in the death of Balder the coming of that long winter in
which they should reign through all the worlds.

A deep hush fell on all created things, and every eye was fixed on the
great ship riding near the shore, and on the funeral pyre rising from
the deck crowned with the forms of Balder and Nanna. Suddenly a gleam of
light flashed over the water; the pile had been kindled, and the flames,
creeping slowly at first, climbed faster and faster until they met over
the dead and rose skyward.

A lurid light filled the heavens and shone on the sea, and in the
brightness of it the gods looked pale and sad, and the circle of giants
grew darker and more portentous. Thor struck the fast burning pyre with
his consecrating hammer, and Odin cast into it the wonderful ring
Draupner. Higher and higher leaped the flames, more and more desolate
grew the scene; at last they began to sink, the funeral pyre was
consumed. Balder had vanished forever, the summer was ended, and winter
waited at the doors.

Meanwhile Hermod was riding hard and fast on his gloomy errand. Nine
days and nights he rode through valleys so deep and dark that he could
not see his horse. Stillness and blackness and solitude were his only
companions until he came to the golden bridge which crosses the river
Gjol. The good horse Sleipner, who had carried Odin on so many strange
journeys, had never travelled such a road before, and his hoofs rang
drearily as he stopped short at the bridge, for in front of him stood
its porter, the gigantic Modgud.

"Who are you?" she asked, fixing her piercing eyes on Hermod. "What is
your name and parentage? Yesterday five bands of dead men rode across
the bridge, and beneath them all it did not shake as under your single
tread. There is no colour of death in your face. Why ride you hither,
the living among the dead?"

"I come," said Hermod, "to seek for Balder. Have you seen him pass this
way?"

"He has already crossed the bridge and taken his journey northward to
Hel."

Then Hermod rode slowly across the bridge that spans the abyss between
life and death, and found his way at last to the barred gates of Hel's
dreadful home. There he sprang to the ground, tightened the girths,
remounted, drove the spurs deep into the horse, and Sleipner, with a
mighty leap, cleared the wall. Hermod rode straight to the gloomy
palace, dismounted, entered, and in a moment was face to face with the
terrible queen of the kingdom of the dead. Beside her, on a beautiful
throne, sat Balder, pale and wan, crowned with a withered wreath of
flowers, and close at hand was Nanna, pallid as her husband, for whom
she had died. And all night long, while ghostly forms wandered restless
and sleepless through Helheim, Hermod talked with Balder and Nanna.
There is no record of what they said, but the talk was sad enough,
doubtless, and ran like a still stream among the happy days in Asgard
when Balder's smile was morning over the earth and the sight of his face
the summer of the world.

When the morning came, faint and dim, through the dusky palace, Hermod
sought Hel, who received him as cold and stern as fate.

"Your kingdom is full, O Hel!" he said, "and without Balder, Asgard is
empty. Send him back to us once more, for there is sadness in every
heart and tears are in every eye. Through heaven and earth all things
weep for him."

"If that is true," was the slow, icy answer, "if every created thing
weeps for Balder, he shall return to Asgard; but if one eye is dry he
remains henceforth in Helheim."

Then Hermod rode swiftly away, and the decree of Hel was soon told in
Asgard. Through all the worlds the gods sent messengers to say that all
who loved Balder should weep for his return, and everywhere tears fell
like rain. There was weeping in Asgard, and in all the earth there was
nothing that did not weep. Men and women and little children, missing
the light that had once fallen into their hearts and homes, sobbed with
bitter grief; the birds of the air, who had sung carols of joy at the
gates of the morning since time began, were full of sorrow; the beasts
of the fields crouched and moaned in their desolation; the great trees,
that had put on their robes of green at Balder's command, sighed as the
wind wailed through them; and the sweet flowers, that waited for
Balder's footstep and sprang up in all the fields to greet him, hung
their frail blossoms and wept bitterly for the love and the warmth and
the light that had gone out. Throughout the whole earth there was
nothing but weeping, and the sound of it was like the wailing of those
storms in autumn that weep for the dead summer as its withered leaves
drop one by one from the trees.

The messengers of the gods went gladly back to Asgard, for everything
had wept for Balder; but as they journeyed they came upon a giantess,
called Thok, and her eyes were dry.

"Weep for Balder," they said.

"With dry eyes only will I weep for Balder," she answered. "Dead or
alive, he never gave me gladness. Let him stay in Helheim."

When she had spoken these words a terrible laugh broke from her lips,
and the messengers looked at each other with pallid faces, for they knew
it was the voice of Loki.

Balder never came back to Asgard, and the shadows deepened over all
things, for the night of death was fast coming on.




CHAPTER XVI

THE STAR AND THE LILY


An old chieftain sat in his wigwam, quietly smoking his favourite pipe,
when a crowd of Indian boys and girls suddenly entered, and, with
numerous offerings of tobacco, begged him to tell them a story, and he
did so.

There was once a time when this world was filled with happy people; when
all the nations were as one, and the crimson tide of war had not begun
to roll. Plenty of game was in the forest and on the plains. None were
in want, for a full supply was at hand. Sickness was unknown. The beasts
of the field were tame; they came and went at the bidding of man. One
unending spring gave no place for winter--for its cold blasts or its
unhealthy chills. Every tree and bush yielded fruit. Flowers carpeted
the earth. The air was laden with their fragrance, and redolent with the
songs of wedded warblers that flew from branch to branch, fearing none,
for there were none to harm them. There were birds then of more
beautiful song and plumage than now. It was at such a time, when earth
was a paradise and man worthily its possessor, that the Indians were
lone inhabitants of the American wilderness. They numbered millions;
and, living as nature designed them to live, enjoyed its many blessings.
Instead of amusements in close rooms, the sport of the field was theirs.
At night they met on the wide green beneath the heavenly worlds--the
_ah-nung-o-kah_. They watched the stars; they loved to gaze at them,
for they believed them to be the residences of the good, who had been
taken home by the Great Spirit.

One night they saw one star that shone brighter than all others. Its
location was far away in the south, near a mountain peak. For many
nights it was seen, till at length it was doubted by many that the star
was as far distant in the southern skies as it seemed to be. This doubt
led to an examination, which proved the star to be only a short distance
away, and near the tops of some trees. A number of warriors were deputed
to go and see what it was. They went, and on their return said it
appeared strange, and somewhat like a bird. A committee of the wise men
were called to inquire into, and if possible to ascertain the meaning
of, the strange phenomenon. They feared that it might be the omen of
some disaster. Some thought it a precursor of good, others of evil; and
some supposed it to be the star spoken of by their forefathers as the
forerunner of a dreadful war.

One moon had nearly gone by, and yet the mystery remained unsolved. One
night a young warrior had a dream, in which a beautiful maiden came and
stood at his side, and thus addressed him: "Young brave! charmed with
the land of my forefathers, its flowers, its birds, its rivers, its
beautiful lakes, and its mountains clothed with green, I have left my
sisters in yonder world to dwell among you. Young brave! ask your wise
and your great men where I can live and see the happy race continually;
ask them what form I shall assume in order to be loved."

Thus discoursed the bright stranger. The young man awoke. On stepping
out of his lodge he saw the star yet blazing in its accustomed place. At
early dawn the chief's crier was sent round the camp to call every
warrior to the council lodge. When they had met, the young warrior
related his dream. They concluded that the star that had been seen in
the south had fallen in love with mankind, and that it was desirous to
dwell with them.

The next night five tall, noble-looking, adventurous braves were sent to
welcome the stranger to earth. They went and presented to it a pipe of
peace, filled with sweet-scented herbs, and were rejoiced that it took
it from them. As they returned to the village, the star, with expanded
wings, followed, and hovered over their homes till the dawn of day.
Again it came to the young man in a dream, and desired to know where it
should live and what form it should take. Places were named--on the top
of giant trees, or in flowers. At length it was told to choose a place
itself, and it did so. At first it dwelt in the white rose of the
mountains; but there it was so buried that it could not be seen. It went
to the prairie; but it feared the hoof of the buffalo. It next sought
the rocky cliff; but there it was so high that the children, whom it
loved most, could not see it.

"I know where I shall live," said the bright fugitive--"where I can see
the gliding canoe of the race I most admire. Children!--yes, they shall
be my playmates, and I will kiss their slumber by the side of cool
lakes. The nation shall love me wherever I am."

These words having been said, she alighted on the waters, where she saw
herself reflected. The next morning thousands of white flowers were seen
on the surface of the lakes, and the Indians gave them this name,
_wah-be-gwan-nee_ (white flower).

This star lived in the southern skies. Her brethren can be seen far off
in the cold north, hunting the Great Bear, whilst her sisters watch her
in the east and west.

Children! when you see the lily on the waters, take it in your hands and
hold it to the skies, that it may be happy on earth, as its two sisters,
the morning and evening stars, are happy in heaven.

﻿THE CAT AND THE MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A cat had made acquaintance with a mouse, and had spoken so much of
the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at last the Mouse
consented to live in the same house with her, and to go shares in the
housekeeping. ‘But we must provide for the winter or else we shall
suffer hunger,’ said the Cat. ‘You, little Mouse, cannot venture
everywhere in case you run at last into a trap.’ This good counsel was
followed, and a little pot of fat was bought. But they did not know
where to put it. At length, after long consultation, the Cat said, ‘I
know of no place where it could be better put than in the church. No one
will trouble to take it away from there. We will hide it in a corner,
and we won’t touch it till we are in want.’ So the little pot was placed
in safety; but it was not long before the Cat had a great longing for
it, and said to the Mouse, ‘I wanted to tell you, little Mouse, that my
cousin has a little son, white with brown spots, and she wants me to be
godmother to it. Let me go out to-day, and do you take care of the house
alone.’

‘Yes, go certainly,’ replied the Mouse, ‘and when you eat anything
good, think of me; I should very much like a drop of the red christening
wine.’

But it was all untrue. The Cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, slunk to the little pot
of fat, began to lick it, and licked the top off. Then she took a walk
on the roofs of the town, looked at the view, stretched herself out in
the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought of the little pot of
fat. As soon as it was evening she went home again.

‘Ah, here you are again!’ said the Mouse; ‘you must certainly have had
an enjoyable day.’

‘It went off very well,’ answered the Cat.

‘What was the child’s name?’ asked the Mouse.

‘Top Off,’ said the Cat drily.

‘Topoff!’ echoed the Mouse, ‘it is indeed a wonderful and curious name.
Is it in your family?’

‘What is there odd about it?’ said the Cat. ‘It is not worse than
Breadthief, as your godchild is called.’

Not long after this another great longing came over the Cat. She said to
the Mouse, ‘You must again be kind enough to look after the house alone,
for I have been asked a second time to stand godmother, and as this
child has a white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’

The kind Mouse agreed, but the Cat slunk under the town wall to the
church, and ate up half of the pot of fat. ‘Nothing tastes better,’ said
she, ‘than what one eats by oneself,’ and she was very much pleased with
her day’s work. When she came home the Mouse asked, ‘What was this child
called?’

‘Half Gone,’ answered the Cat.

‘Halfgone! what a name! I have never heard it in my life. I don’t
believe it is in the calendar.’

Soon the Cat’s mouth began to water once more after her licking
business. ‘All good things in threes,’ she said to the Mouse; ‘I have
again to stand godmother. The child is quite black, and has very white
paws, but not a single white hair on its body. This only happens once in
two years, so you will let me go out?’

‘Topoff! Halfgone!’ repeated the Mouse, ‘they are such curious names;
they make me very thoughtful.’

‘Oh, you sit at home in your dark grey coat and your long tail,’ said
the Cat, ‘and you get fanciful. That comes of not going out in the day.’

The Mouse had a good cleaning out while the Cat was gone, and made the
house tidy; but the greedy Cat ate the fat every bit up.

‘When it is all gone one can be at rest,’ she said to herself, and at
night she came home sleek and satisfied. The Mouse asked at once after
the third child’s name.

‘It won’t please you any better,’ said the Cat, ‘he was called Clean
Gone.’

‘Cleangone!’ repeated the Mouse. ‘I do not believe that name has been
printed any more than the others. Cleangone! What can it mean?’ She
shook her head, curled herself up, and went to sleep.

From this time on no one asked the Cat to stand godmother; but when
the winter came and there was nothing to be got outside, the Mouse
remembered their provision and said, ‘Come, Cat, we will go to our pot
of fat which we have stored away; it will taste very good.’

‘Yes, indeed,’ answered the Cat; ‘it will taste as good to you as if
you stretched your thin tongue out of the window.’

They started off, and when they reached it they found the pot in its
place, but quite empty!

‘Ah,’ said the Mouse,’ ‘now I know what has happened! It has all come
out! You are a true friend to me! You have eaten it all when you stood
godmother; first the top off, then half of it gone, then----’

‘Will you be quiet!’ screamed the Cat. ‘Another word and I will eat you
up.’

‘Clean-gone’ was already on the poor Mouse’s tongue, and scarcely was it
out than the Cat made a spring at her, seized and swallowed her.

You see that is the way of the world.




THE SIX SWANS

A king was once hunting in a great wood, and he hunted the game so
eagerly that none of his courtiers could follow him. When evening came
on he stood still and looked round him, and he saw that he had quite
lost himself. He sought a way out, but could find none. Then he saw an
old woman with a shaking head coming towards him; but she was a witch.

‘Good woman,’ he said to her, ‘can you not show me the way out of the
wood?’

‘Oh, certainly, Sir King,’ she replied, ‘I can quite well do that, but
on one condition, which if you do not fulfil you will never get out of
the wood, and will die of hunger.’

‘What is the condition?’ asked the King.

‘I have a daughter,’ said the old woman, ‘who is so beautiful that she
has not her equal in the world, and is well fitted to be your wife; if
you will make her lady-queen I will show you the way out of the wood.’

The King in his anguish of mind consented, and the old woman led him
to her little house where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She
received the King as if she were expecting him, and he saw that she was
certainly very beautiful; but she did not please him, and he could not
look at her without a secret feeling of horror. As soon as he had lifted
the maiden on to his horse the old woman showed him the way, and the
King reached his palace, where the wedding was celebrated.

The King had already been married once, and had by his first wife seven
children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved more than anything in the
world. And now, because he was afraid that their stepmother might not
treat them well and might do them harm, he put them in a lonely castle
that stood in the middle of a wood. It lay so hidden, and the way to it
was so hard to find, that he himself could not have found it out had
not a wise-woman given him a reel of thread which possessed a marvellous
property: when he threw it before him it unwound itself and showed him
the way. But the King went so often to his dear children that the Queen
was offended at his absence. She grew curious, and wanted to know what
he had to do quite alone in the wood. She gave his servants a great deal
of money, and they betrayed the secret to her, and also told her of the
reel which alone could point out the way. She had no rest now till she
had found out where the King guarded the reel, and then she made some
little white shirts, and, as she had learnt from her witch-mother, sewed
an enchantment in each of them.

And when the King had ridden off she took the little shirts and went
into the wood, and the reel showed her the way. The children, who saw
someone coming in the distance, thought it was their dear father coming
to them, and sprang to meet him very joyfully. Then she threw over each
one a little shirt, which when it had touched their bodies changed them
into swans, and they flew away over the forest. The Queen went home
quite satisfied, and thought she had got rid of her step-children; but
the girl had not run to meet her with her brothers, and she knew nothing
of her.

The next day the King came to visit his children, but he found no one
but the girl.

‘Where are your brothers?’ asked the King.

‘Alas! dear father,’ she answered, ‘they have gone away and left me all
alone.’ And she told him that looking out of her little window she had
seen her brothers flying over the wood in the shape of swans, and she
showed him the feathers which they had let fall in the yard, and which
she had collected. The King mourned, but he did not think that the Queen
had done the wicked deed, and as he was afraid the maiden would also be
taken from him, he wanted to take her with him. But she was afraid of
the stepmother, and begged the King to let her stay just one night
more in the castle in the wood. The poor maiden thought, ‘My home is no
longer here; I will go and seek my brothers.’ And when night came she
fled away into the forest. She ran all through the night and the next
day, till she could go no farther for weariness. Then she saw a little
hut, went in, and found a room with six little beds. She was afraid to
lie down on one, so she crept under one of them, lay on the hard floor,
and was going to spend the night there. But when the sun had set she
heard a noise, and saw six swans flying in at the window. They stood on
the floor and blew at one another, and blew all their feathers off, and
their swan-skin came off like a shirt. Then the maiden recognised her
brothers, and overjoyed she crept out from under the bed. Her brothers
were not less delighted than she to see their little sister again, but
their joy did not last long.

‘You cannot stay here,’ they said to her. ‘This is a den of robbers; if
they were to come here and find you they would kill you.’

‘Could you not protect me?’ asked the little sister.

‘No,’ they answered, ‘for we can only lay aside our swan skins for a
quarter of an hour every evening. For this time we regain our human
forms, but then we are changed into swans again.’

Then the little sister cried and said, ‘Can you not be freed?’

‘Oh, no,’ they said, ‘the conditions are too hard. You must not speak or
laugh for six years, and must make in that time six shirts for us out of
star-flowers. If a single word comes out of your mouth, all your labour
is vain.’ And when the brothers had said this the quarter of an hour
came to an end, and they flew away out of the window as swans.

But the maiden had determined to free her brothers even if it should
cost her her life. She left the hut, went into the forest, climbed
a tree, and spent the night there. The next morning she went out,
collected star-flowers, and began to sew. She could speak to no one, and
she had no wish to laugh, so she sat there, looking only at her work.

When she had lived there some time, it happened that the King of the
country was hunting in the forest, and his hunters came to the tree on
which the maiden sat. They called to her and said ‘Who are you?’

But she gave no answer.

‘Come down to us,’ they said, ‘we will do you no harm.’

But she shook her head silently. As they pressed her further with
questions, she threw them the golden chain from her neck. But they did
not leave off, and she threw them her girdle, and when this was no use,
her garters, and then her dress. The huntsmen would not leave her alone,
but climbed the tree, lifted the maiden down, and led her to the King.
The King asked, ‘Who are you? What are you doing up that tree?’

But she answered nothing.

He asked her in all the languages he knew, but she remained as dumb as
a fish. Because she was so beautiful, however, the King’s heart was
touched, and he was seized with a great love for her. He wrapped her up
in his cloak, placed her before him on his horse, and brought her to his
castle. There he had her dressed in rich clothes, and her beauty shone
out as bright as day, but not a word could be drawn from her. He set her
at table by his side, and her modest ways and behaviour pleased him
so much that he said, ‘I will marry this maiden and none other in the
world,’ and after some days he married her. But the King had a wicked
mother who was displeased with the marriage, and said wicked things of
the young Queen. ‘Who knows who this girl is?’ she said; ‘she cannot
speak, and is not worthy of a king.’

After a year, when the Queen had her first child, the old mother took
it away from her. Then she went to the King and said that the Queen had
killed it. The King would not believe it, and would not allow any harm
to be done her. But she sat quietly sewing at the shirts and troubling
herself about nothing. The next time she had a child the wicked mother
did the same thing, but the King could not make up his mind to believe
her. He said, ‘She is too sweet and good to do such a thing as that.
If she were not dumb and could defend herself, her innocence would be
proved.’ But when the third child was taken away, and the Queen was
again accused, and could not utter a word in her own defence, the King
was obliged to give her over to the law, which decreed that she must
be burnt to death. When the day came on which the sentence was to be
executed, it was the last day of the six years in which she must not
speak or laugh, and now she had freed her dear brothers from the power
of the enchantment. The six shirts were done; there was only the left
sleeve wanting to the last.

When she was led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her arm, and as
she stood on the pile and the fire was about to be lighted, she looked
around her and saw six swans flying through the air. Then she knew
that her release was at hand and her heart danced for joy. The swans
fluttered round her, and hovered low so that she could throw the shirts
over them. When they had touched them the swan-skins fell off, and her
brothers stood before her living, well and beautiful. Only the youngest
had a swan’s wing instead of his left arm. They embraced and kissed
each other, and the Queen went to the King, who was standing by in great
astonishment, and began to speak to him, saying, ‘Dearest husband, now
I can speak and tell you openly that I am innocent and have been falsely
accused.’

She told him of the old woman’s deceit, and how she had taken the three
children away and hidden them. Then they were fetched, to the great joy
of the King, and the wicked mother came to no good end.

But the King and the Queen with their six brothers lived many years in
happiness and peace.




THE DRAGON OF THE NORTH(2)

(2) ‘Der Norlands Drache,’ from Esthnische Mahrchen. Kreutzwald.

Very long ago, as old people have told me, there lived a terrible
monster, who came out of the North, and laid waste whole tracts
of country, devouring both men and beasts; and this monster was so
destructive that it was feared that unless help came no living creature
would be left on the face of the earth. It had a body like an ox, and
legs like a frog, two short fore-legs, and two long ones behind, and
besides that it had a tail like a serpent, ten fathoms in length. When
it moved it jumped like a frog, and with every spring it covered half a
mile of ground. Fortunately its habit, was to remain for several years
in the same place, and not to move on till the whole neighbourhood was
eaten up. Nothing could hunt it, because its whole body was covered with
scales, which were harder than stone or metal; its two great eyes shone
by night, and even by day, like the brightest lamps, and anyone who had
the ill luck to look into those eyes became as it were bewitched, and
was obliged to rush of his own accord into the monster’s jaws. In this
way the Dragon was able to feed upon both men and beasts without the
least trouble to itself, as it needed not to move from the spot where it
was lying. All the neighbouring kings had offered rich rewards to
anyone who should be able to destroy the monster, either by force
or enchantment, and many had tried their luck, but all had miserably
failed. Once a great forest in which the Dragon lay had been set on
fire; the forest was burnt down, but the fire did not do the monster the
least harm. However, there was a tradition amongst the wise men of the
country that the Dragon might be overcome by one who possessed King
Solomon’s signet-ring, upon which a secret writing was engraved. This
inscription would enable anyone who was wise enough to interpret it to
find out how the Dragon could be destroyed. Only no one knew where the
ring was hidden, nor was there any sorcerer or learned man to be found
who would be able to explain the inscription.

At last a young man, with a good heart and plenty of courage, set out to
search for the ring. He took his way towards the sunrising, because he
knew that all the wisdom of old time comes from the East. After some
years he met with a famous Eastern magician, and asked for his advice in
the matter. The magician answered:

‘Mortal men have but little wisdom, and can give you no help, but the
birds of the air would be better guides to you if you could learn their
language. I can help you to understand it if you will stay with me a few
days.’

The youth thankfully accepted the magician’s offer, and said, ‘I cannot
now offer you any reward for your kindness, but should my undertaking
succeed your trouble shall be richly repaid.’

Then the magician brewed a powerful potion out of nine sorts of herbs
which he had gathered himself all alone by moonlight, and he gave the
youth nine spoonfuls of it daily for three days, which made him able to
understand the language of birds.

At parting the magician said to him. ‘If you ever find Solomon’s ring
and get possession of it, then come back to me, that I may explain the
inscription on the ring to you, for there is no one else in the world
who can do this.’

From that time the youth never felt lonely as he walked along; he always
had company, because he understood the language of birds; and in this
way he learned many things which mere human knowledge could never have
taught him. But time went on, and he heard nothing about the ring. It
happened one evening, when he was hot and tired with walking, and had
sat down under a tree in a forest to eat his supper, that he saw two
gaily-plumaged birds, that were strange to him, sitting at the top of
the tree talking to one another about him. The first bird said:

‘I know that wandering fool under the tree there, who has come so far
without finding what he seeks. He is trying to find King Solomon’s lost
ring.’

The other bird answered, ‘He will have to seek help from the
Witch-maiden,(3) who will doubtless be able to put him on the right
track. If she has not got the ring herself, she knows well enough who
has it.’

(3) Hollenmadchen.


‘But where is he to find the Witch-maiden?’ said the first bird. ‘She
has no settled dwelling, but is here to-day and gone to-morrow. He might
as well try to catch the wind.’

The other replied, ‘I do not know, certainly, where she is at present,
but in three nights from now she will come to the spring to wash her
face, as she does every month when the moon is full, in order that
she may never grow old nor wrinkled, but may always keep the bloom of
youth.’

‘Well,’ said the first bird, ‘the spring is not far from here. Shall we
go and see how it is she does it?’

‘Willingly, if you like,’ said the other.

The youth immediately resolved to follow the birds to the spring, only
two things made him uneasy: first, lest he might be asleep when the
birds went, and secondly, lest he might lose sight of them, since he had
not wings to carry him along so swiftly. He was too tired to keep awake
all night, yet his anxiety prevented him from sleeping soundly, and when
with the earliest dawn he looked up to the tree-top, he was glad to
see his feathered companions still asleep with their heads under their
wings. He ate his breakfast, and waited until the birds should start,
but they did not leave the place all day. They hopped about from one
tree to another looking for food, all day long until the evening, when
they went back to their old perch to sleep. The next day the same thing
happened, but on the third morning one bird said to the other, ‘To-day
we must go to the spring to see the Witch-maiden wash her face.’ They
remained on the tree till noon; then they flew away and went towards the
south. The young man’s heart beat with anxiety lest he should lose sight
of his guides, but he managed to keep the birds in view until they again
perched upon a tree. The young man ran after them until he was quite
exhausted and out of breath, and after three short rests the birds at
length reached a small open space in the forest, on the edge of which
they placed themselves on the top of a high tree. When the youth had
overtaken them, he saw that there was a clear spring in the middle of
the space. He sat down at the foot of the tree upon which the birds
were perched, and listened attentively to what they were saying to each
other.

‘The sun is not down yet,’ said the first bird; ‘we must wait yet awhile
till the moon rises and the maiden comes to the spring. Do you think she
will see that young man sitting under the tree?’

‘Nothing is likely to escape her eyes, certainly not a young man, said
the other bird. ‘Will the youth have the sense not to let himself be
caught in her toils?’

‘We will wait,’ said the first bird, ‘and see how they get on together.’

The evening light had quite faded, and the full moon was already shining
down upon the forest, when the young man heard a slight rustling sound.
After a few moments there came out of the forest a maiden, gliding over
the grass so lightly that her feet seemed scarcely to touch the ground,
and stood beside the spring. The youth could not turn away his eyes
from the maiden, for he had never in his life seen a woman so beautiful.
Without seeming to notice anything, she went to the spring, looked up
to the full moon, then knelt down and bathed her face nine times, then
looked up to the moon again and walked nine times round the well, and as
she walked she sang this song:

          ‘Full-faced moon with light unshaded,
           Let my beauty ne’er be faded.
            Never let my cheek grow pale!
        While the moon is waning nightly,
           May the maiden bloom more brightly,
           May her freshness never fail!’

Then she dried her face with her long hair, and was about to go away,
when her eye suddenly fell upon the spot where the young man was
sitting, and she turned towards the tree. The youth rose and stood
waiting. Then the maiden said, ‘You ought to have a heavy punishment
because you have presumed to watch my secret doings in the moonlight.
But I will forgive you this time, because you are a stranger and knew no
better. But you must tell me truly who you are and how you came to this
place, where no mortal has ever set foot before.’

The youth answered humbly: ‘Forgive me, beautiful maiden, if I have
unintentionally offended you. I chanced to come here after long
wandering, and found a good place to sleep under this tree. At your
coming I did not know what to do, but stayed where I was, because I
thought my silent watching could not offend you.’

The maiden answered kindly, ‘Come and spend this night with us. You will
sleep better on a pillow than on damp moss.’

The youth hesitated for a little, but presently he heard the birds
saying from the top of the tree, ‘Go where she calls you, but take care
to give no blood, or you will sell your soul.’ So the youth went with
her, and soon they reached a beautiful garden, where stood a splendid
house, which glittered in the moonlight as if it was all built out of
gold and silver. When the youth entered he found many splendid chambers,
each one finer than the last. Hundreds of tapers burnt upon golden
candlesticks, and shed a light like the brightest day. At length they
reached a chamber where a table was spread with the most costly dishes.
At the table were placed two chairs, one of silver, the other of gold.
The maiden seated herself upon the golden chair, and offered the silver
one to her companion. They were served by maidens dressed in white,
whose feet made no sound as they moved about, and not a word was spoken
during the meal. Afterwards the youth and the Witch-maiden conversed
pleasantly together, until a woman, dressed in red, came in to remind
them that it was bedtime. The youth was now shown into another room,
containing a silken bed with down cushions, where he slept delightfully,
yet he seemed to hear a voice near his bed which repeated to him,
‘Remember to give no blood!’

The next morning the maiden asked him whether he would not like to
stay with her always in this beautiful place, and as he did not answer
immediately, she continued: ‘You see how I always remain young and
beautiful, and I am under no one’s orders, but can do just what I like,
so that I have never thought of marrying before. But from the moment I
saw you I took a fancy to you, so if you agree, we might be married and
might live together like princes, because I have great riches.’

The youth could not but be tempted with the beautiful maiden’s offer,
but he remembered how the birds had called her the witch, and their
warning always sounded in his ears. Therefore he answered cautiously,
‘Do not be angry, dear maiden, if I do not decide immediately on this
important matter. Give me a few days to consider before we come to an
understanding.’

‘Why not?’ answered the maiden. ‘Take some weeks to consider if you
like, and take counsel with your own heart.’ And to make the time
pass pleasantly, she took the youth over every part of her beautiful
dwelling, and showed him all her splendid treasures. But these treasures
were all produced by enchantment, for the maiden could make anything she
wished appear by the help of King Solomon’s signet ring; only none of
these things remained fixed; they passed away like the wind without
leaving a trace behind. But the youth did not know this; he thought they
were all real.

One day the maiden took him into a secret chamber, where a little gold
box was standing on a silver table. Pointing to the box, she said, ‘Here
is my greatest treasure, whose like is not to be found in the whole
world. It is a precious gold ring. When you marry me, I will give you
this ring as a marriage gift, and it will make you the happiest of
mortal men. But in order that our love may last for ever, you must give
me for the ring three drops of blood from the little finger of your left
hand.’

When the youth heard these words a cold shudder ran over him, for he
remembered that his soul was at stake. He was cunning enough, however,
to conceal his feelings and to make no direct answer, but he only asked
the maiden, as if carelessly, what was remarkable about the ring?

She answered, ‘No mortal is able entirely to understand the power
of this ring, because no one thoroughly understands the secret signs
engraved upon it. But even with my half-knowledge I can work great
wonders. If I put the ring upon the little finger of my left hand, then
I can fly like a bird through the air wherever I wish to go. If I put
it on the third finger of my left hand I am invisible, and I can see
everything that passes around me, though no one can see me. If I put the
ring upon the middle finger of my left hand, then neither fire nor water
nor any sharp weapon can hurt me. If I put it on the forefinger of my
left hand, then I can with its help produce whatever I wish. I can in a
single moment build houses or anything I desire. Finally, as long as I
wear the ring on the thumb of my left hand, that hand is so strong that
it can break down rocks and walls. Besides these, the ring has other
secret signs which, as I said, no one can understand. No doubt it
contains secrets of great importance. The ring formerly belonged to King
Solomon, the wisest of kings, during whose reign the wisest men lived.
But it is not known whether this ring was ever made by mortal hands: it
is supposed that an angel gave it to the wise King.’

When the youth heard all this he determined to try and get possession of
the ring, though he did not quite believe in all its wonderful gifts.
He wished the maiden would let him have it in his hand, but he did not
quite like to ask her to do so, and after a while she put it back into
the box. A few days after they were again speaking of the magic ring,
and the youth said, ‘I do not think it possible that the ring can have
all the power you say it has.’

Then the maiden opened the box and took the ring out, and it glittered
as she held it like the clearest sunbeam. She put it on the middle
finger of her left hand, and told the youth to take a knife and try as
hard as he could to cut her with it, for he would not be able to hurt
her. He was unwilling at first, but the maiden insisted. Then he tried,
at first only in play, and then seriously, to strike her with the knife,
but an invisible wall of iron seemed to be between them, and the maiden
stood before him laughing and unhurt. Then she put the ring on her third
finger, and in an instant she had vanished from his eyes. Presently she
was beside him again laughing, and holding the ring between her fingers.

‘Do let me try,’ said the youth, ‘whether I can do these wonderful
things.’

The maiden, suspecting no treachery, gave him the magic ring.

The youth pretended to have forgotten what to do, and asked what finger
he must put the ring on so that no sharp weapon could hurt him?’

‘Oh, the middle finger of your left hand,’ the maiden answered,
laughing.

She took the knife and tried to strike the youth, and he even tried to
cut himself with it, but found it impossible. Then he asked the maiden
to show him how to split stones and rocks with the help of the ring. So
she led him into a courtyard where stood a great boulder-stone. ‘Now,’
she said, ‘put the ring upon the thumb of your left hand, and you will
see how strong that hand has become. The youth did so, and found to his
astonishment that with a single blow of his fist the stone flew into a
thousand pieces. Then the youth bethought him that he who does not use
his luck when he has it is a fool, and that this was a chance which once
lost might never return. So while they stood laughing at the shattered
stone he placed the ring, as if in play, upon the third finger of his
left hand.

‘Now,’ said the maiden, ‘you are invisible to me until you take the ring
off again.’

But the youth had no mind to do that; on the contrary, he went farther
off, then put the ring on the little finger of his left hand, and soared
into the air like a bird.

When the maiden saw him flying away she thought at first that he was
still in play, and cried, ‘Come back, friend, for now you see I have
told you the truth.’ But the young man never came back.

Then the maiden saw she was deceived, and bitterly repented that she had
ever trusted him with the ring.

The young man never halted in his flight until he reached the dwelling
of the wise magician who had taught him the speech of birds. The
magician was delighted to find that his search had been successful,
and at once set to work to interpret the secret signs engraved upon the
ring, but it took him seven weeks to make them out clearly. Then he gave
the youth the following instructions how to overcome the Dragon of the
North: ‘You must have an iron horse cast, which must have little wheels
under each foot. You must also be armed with a spear two fathoms long,
which you will be able to wield by means of the magic ring upon your
left thumb. The spear must be as thick in the middle as a large tree,
and both its ends must be sharp. In the middle of the spear you must
have two strong chains ten fathoms in length. As soon as the Dragon has
made himself fast to the spear, which you must thrust through his jaws,
you must spring quickly from the iron horse and fasten the ends of the
chains firmly to the ground with iron stakes, so that he cannot get away
from them. After two or three days the monster’s strength will be so
far exhausted that you will be able to come near him. Then you can put
Solomon’s ring upon your left thumb and give him the finishing stroke,
but keep the ring on your third finger until you have come close to him,
so that the monster cannot see you, else he might strike you dead with
his long tail. But when all is done, take care you do not lose the ring,
and that no one takes it from you by cunning.’

The young man thanked the magician for his directions, and promised,
should they succeed, to reward him. But the magician answered, ‘I have
profited so much by the wisdom the ring has taught me that I desire no
other reward.’ Then they parted, and the youth quickly flew home through
the air. After remaining in his own home for some weeks, he heard people
say that the terrible Dragon of the North was not far off, and might
shortly be expected in the country. The King announced publicly that
he would give his daughter in marriage, as well as a large part of his
kingdom, to whosoever should free the country from the monster. The
youth then went to the King and told him that he had good hopes of
subduing the Dragon, if the King would grant him all he desired for the
purpose. The King willingly agreed, and the iron horse, the great spear,
and the chains were all prepared as the youth requested. When all was
ready, it was found that the iron horse was so heavy that a hundred men
could not move it from the spot, so the youth found there was nothing
for it but to move it with his own strength by means of the magic ring.
The Dragon was now so near that in a couple of springs he would be over
the frontier. The youth now began to consider how he should act, for if
he had to push the iron horse from behind he could not ride upon it as
the sorcerer had said he must. But a raven unexpectedly gave him this
advice: ‘Ride upon the horse, and push the spear against the ground,
as if you were pushing off a boat from the land.’ The youth did so, and
found that in this way he could easily move forwards. The Dragon had his
monstrous jaws wide open, all ready for his expected prey. A few paces
nearer, and man and horse would have been swallowed up by them! The
youth trembled with horror, and his blood ran cold, yet he did not lose
his courage; but, holding the iron spear upright in his hand, he brought
it down with all his might right through the monster’s lower jaw. Then
quick as lightning he sprang from his horse before the Dragon had time
to shut his mouth. A fearful clap like thunder, which could be heard for
miles around, now warned him that the Dragon’s jaws had closed upon
the spear. When the youth turned round he saw the point of the spear
sticking up high above the Dragon’s upper jaw, and knew that the other
end must be fastened firmly to the ground; but the Dragon had got his
teeth fixed in the iron horse, which was now useless. The youth now
hastened to fasten down the chains to the ground by means of the
enormous iron pegs which he had provided. The death struggle of the
monster lasted three days and three nights; in his writhing he beat his
tail so violently against the ground, that at ten miles’ distance the
earth trembled as if with an earthquake. When he at length lost power to
move his tail, the youth with the help of the ring took up a stone which
twenty ordinary men could not have moved, and beat the Dragon so hard
about the head with it that very soon the monster lay lifeless before
him.

You can fancy how great was the rejoicing when the news was spread
abroad that the terrible monster was dead. His conqueror was received
into the city with as much pomp as if he had been the mightiest of
kings. The old King did not need to urge his daughter to marry the
slayer of the Dragon; he found her already willing to bestow her hand
upon this hero, who had done all alone what whole armies had tried in
vain to do. In a few days a magnificent wedding was celebrated, at which
the rejoicings lasted four whole weeks, for all the neighbouring kings
had met together to thank the man who had freed the world from their
common enemy. But everyone forgot amid the general joy that they ought
to have buried the Dragon’s monstrous body, for it began now to have
such a bad smell that no one could live in the neighbourhood, and
before long the whole air was poisoned, and a pestilence broke out
which destroyed many hundreds of people. In this distress, the King’s
son-in-law resolved to seek help once more from the Eastern magician, to
whom he at once travelled through the air like a bird by the help of
the ring. But there is a proverb which says that ill-gotten gains never
prosper, and the Prince found that the stolen ring brought him ill-luck
after all. The Witch-maiden had never rested night nor day until she had
found out where the ring was. As soon as she had discovered by means of
magical arts that the Prince in the form of a bird was on his way to the
Eastern magician, she changed herself into an eagle and watched in the
air until the bird she was waiting for came in sight, for she knew him
at once by the ring which was hung round his neck by a ribbon. Then the
eagle pounced upon the bird, and the moment she seized him in her talons
she tore the ring from his neck before the man in bird’s shape had time
to prevent her. Then the eagle flew down to the earth with her prey, and
the two stood face to face once more in human form.

‘Now, villain, you are in my power!’ cried the Witch-maiden. ‘I favoured
you with my love, and you repaid me with treachery and theft. You stole
my most precious jewel from me, and do you expect to live happily as the
King’s son-in-law? Now the tables are turned; you are in my power, and I
will be revenged on you for your crimes.’

‘Forgive me! forgive me!’ cried the Prince; ‘I know too well how deeply
I have wronged you, and most heartily do I repent it.’

The maiden answered, ‘Your prayers and your repentance come too late,
and if I were to spare you everyone would think me a fool. You have
doubly wronged me; first you scorned my love, and then you stole my
ring, and you must bear the punishment.’

With these words she put the ring upon her left thumb, lifted the young
man with one hand, and walked away with him under her arm. This time
she did not take him to a splendid palace, but to a deep cave in a rock,
where there were chains hanging from the wall. The maiden now chained
the young man’s hands and feet so that he could not escape; then she
said in an angry voice, ‘Here you shall remain chained up until you die.
I will bring you every day enough food to prevent you dying of hunger,
but you need never hope for freedom any more.’ With these words she left
him.

The old King and his daughter waited anxiously for many weeks for the
Prince’s return, but no news of him arrived. The King’s daughter often
dreamed that her husband was going through some great suffering: she
therefore begged her father to summon all the enchanters and magicians,
that they might try to find out where the Prince was and how he could
be set free. But the magicians, with all their arts, could find out
nothing, except that he was still living and undergoing great suffering;
but none could tell where he was to be found. At last a celebrated
magician from Finland was brought before the King, who had found out
that the King’s son-in-law was imprisoned in the East, not by men, but
by some more powerful being. The King now sent messengers to the East to
look for his son-in-law, and they by good luck met with the old magician
who had interpreted the signs on King Solomon’s ring, and thus was
possessed of more wisdom than anyone else in the world. The magician
soon found out what he wished to know, and pointed out the place where
the Prince was imprisoned, but said: ‘He is kept there by enchantment,
and cannot be set free without my help. I will therefore go with you
myself.’

So they all set out, guided by birds, and after some days came to the
cave where the unfortunate Prince had been chained up for nearly seven
years. He recognised the magician immediately, but the old man did not
know him, he had grown so thin. However, he undid the chains by the
help of magic, and took care of the Prince until he recovered and became
strong enough to travel. When he reached home he found that the old King
had died that morning, so that he was now raised to the throne. And now
after his long suffering came prosperity, which lasted to the end of his
life; but he never got back the magic ring, nor has it ever again been
seen by mortal eyes.

Now, if YOU had been the Prince, would you not rather have stayed with
the pretty witch-maiden?




STORY OF THE EMPEROR’S NEW CLOTHES(4)

(4) Andersen.

Many years ago there lived an Emperor who was so fond of new clothes
that he spent all his money on them in order to be beautifully dressed.
He did not care about his soldiers, he did not care about the theatre;
he only liked to go out walking to show off his new clothes. He had a
coat for every hour of the day; and just as they say of a king, ‘He is
in the council-chamber,’ they always said here, ‘The Emperor is in the
wardrobe.’

In the great city in which he lived there was always something going on;
every day many strangers came there. One day two impostors arrived
who gave themselves out as weavers, and said that they knew how to
manufacture the most beautiful cloth imaginable. Not only were the
texture and pattern uncommonly beautiful, but the clothes which were
made of the stuff possessed this wonderful property that they were
invisible to anyone who was not fit for his office, or who was
unpardonably stupid.

‘Those must indeed be splendid clothes,’ thought the Emperor. ‘If I
had them on I could find out which men in my kingdom are unfit for the
offices they hold; I could distinguish the wise from the stupid! Yes,
this cloth must be woven for me at once.’ And he gave both the impostors
much money, so that they might begin their work.

They placed two weaving-looms, and began to do as if they were working,
but they had not the least thing on the looms. They also demanded the
finest silk and the best gold, which they put in their pockets, and
worked at the empty looms till late into the night.

‘I should like very much to know how far they have got on with the
cloth,’ thought the Emperor. But he remembered when he thought about it
that whoever was stupid or not fit for his office would not be able
to see it. Now he certainly believed that he had nothing to fear for
himself, but he wanted first to send somebody else in order to see how
he stood with regard to his office. Everybody in the whole town knew
what a wonderful power the cloth had, and they were all curious to see
how bad or how stupid their neighbour was.

‘I will send my old and honoured minister to the weavers,’ thought
the Emperor. ‘He can judge best what the cloth is like, for he has
intellect, and no one understands his office better than he.’

Now the good old minister went into the hall where the two impostors sat
working at the empty weaving-looms. ‘Dear me!’ thought the old minister,
opening his eyes wide, ‘I can see nothing!’ But he did not say so.

Both the impostors begged him to be so kind as to step closer, and asked
him if it were not a beautiful texture and lovely colours. They pointed
to the empty loom, and the poor old minister went forward rubbing his
eyes; but he could see nothing, for there was nothing there.

‘Dear, dear!’ thought he, ‘can I be stupid? I have never thought that,
and nobody must know it! Can I be not fit for my office? No, I must
certainly not say that I cannot see the cloth!’

‘Have you nothing to say about it?’ asked one of the men who was
weaving.

‘Oh, it is lovely, most lovely!’ answered the old minister, looking
through his spectacles. ‘What a texture! What colours! Yes, I will tell
the Emperor that it pleases me very much.’

‘Now we are delighted at that,’ said both the weavers, and thereupon
they named the colours and explained the make of the texture.

The old minister paid great attention, so that he could tell the same to
the Emperor when he came back to him, which he did.

The impostors now wanted more money, more silk, and more gold to use in
their weaving. They put it all in their own pockets, and there came no
threads on the loom, but they went on as they had done before, working
at the empty loom. The Emperor soon sent another worthy statesman to
see how the weaving was getting on, and whether the cloth would soon
be finished. It was the same with him as the first one; he looked and
looked, but because there was nothing on the empty loom he could see
nothing.

‘Is it not a beautiful piece of cloth?’ asked the two impostors, and
they pointed to and described the splendid material which was not there.

‘Stupid I am not!’ thought the man, ‘so it must be my good office for
which I am not fitted. It is strange, certainly, but no one must be
allowed to notice it.’ And so he praised the cloth which he did not
see, and expressed to them his delight at the beautiful colours and the
splendid texture. ‘Yes, it is quite beautiful,’ he said to the Emperor.

Everybody in the town was talking of the magnificent cloth.

Now the Emperor wanted to see it himself while it was still on the
loom. With a great crowd of select followers, amongst whom were both
the worthy statesmen who had already been there before, he went to
the cunning impostors, who were now weaving with all their might, but
without fibre or thread.

‘Is it not splendid!’ said both the old statesmen who had already been
there. ‘See, your Majesty, what a texture! What colours!’ And then they
pointed to the empty loom, for they believed that the others could see
the cloth quite well.

‘What!’ thought the Emperor, ‘I can see nothing! This is indeed
horrible! Am I stupid? Am I not fit to be Emperor? That were the most
dreadful thing that could happen to me. Oh, it is very beautiful,’ he
said. ‘It has my gracious approval.’ And then he nodded pleasantly, and
examined the empty loom, for he would not say that he could see nothing.

His whole Court round him looked and looked, and saw no more than the
others; but they said like the Emperor, ‘Oh! it is beautiful!’ And they
advised him to wear these new and magnificent clothes for the first time
at the great procession which was soon to take place. ‘Splendid! Lovely!
Most beautiful!’ went from mouth to mouth; everyone seemed delighted
over them, and the Emperor gave to the impostors the title of Court
weavers to the Emperor.

Throughout the whole of the night before the morning on which the
procession was to take place, the impostors were up and were working by
the light of over sixteen candles. The people could see that they were
very busy making the Emperor’s new clothes ready. They pretended they
were taking the cloth from the loom, cut with huge scissors in the
air, sewed with needles without thread, and then said at last, ‘Now the
clothes are finished!’

The Emperor came himself with his most distinguished knights, and each
impostor held up his arm just as if he were holding something, and said,
‘See! here are the breeches! Here is the coat! Here the cloak!’ and so
on.

‘Spun clothes are so comfortable that one would imagine one had nothing
on at all; but that is the beauty of it!’

‘Yes,’ said all the knights, but they could see nothing, for there was
nothing there.

‘Will it please your Majesty graciously to take off your clothes,’ said
the impostors, ‘then we will put on the new clothes, here before the
mirror.’

The Emperor took off all his clothes, and the impostors placed
themselves before him as if they were putting on each part of his new
clothes which was ready, and the Emperor turned and bent himself in
front of the mirror.

‘How beautifully they fit! How well they sit!’ said everybody. ‘What
material! What colours! It is a gorgeous suit!’

‘They are waiting outside with the canopy which your Majesty is wont
to have borne over you in the procession,’ announced the Master of the
Ceremonies.

‘Look, I am ready,’ said the Emperor. ‘Doesn’t it sit well!’ And he
turned himself again to the mirror to see if his finery was on all
right.

The chamberlains who were used to carry the train put their hands near
the floor as if they were lifting up the train; then they did as if they
were holding something in the air. They would not have it noticed that
they could see nothing.

So the Emperor went along in the procession under the splendid canopy,
and all the people in the streets and at the windows said, ‘How
matchless are the Emperor’s new clothes! That train fastened to his
dress, how beautifully it hangs!’

No one wished it to be noticed that he could see nothing, for then he
would have been unfit for his office, or else very stupid. None of the
Emperor’s clothes had met with such approval as these had.

‘But he has nothing on!’ said a little child at last.

‘Just listen to the innocent child!’ said the father, and each one
whispered to his neighbour what the child had said.

‘But he has nothing on!’ the whole of the people called out at last.

This struck the Emperor, for it seemed to him as if they were right; but
he thought to himself, ‘I must go on with the procession now. And the
chamberlains walked along still more uprightly, holding up the train
which was not there at all.




THE GOLDEN CRAB(5)

(5) ‘Prinz Krebs,’ from Griechische Mahrchen. Schmidt.

Once upon a time there was a fisherman who had a wife and three
children. Every morning he used to go out fishing, and whatever fish he
caught he sold to the King. One day, among the other fishes, he caught
a golden crab. When he came home he put all the fishes together into
a great dish, but he kept the Crab separate because it shone so
beautifully, and placed it upon a high shelf in the cupboard. Now while
the old woman, his wife, was cleaning the fish, and had tucked up her
gown so that her feet were visible, she suddenly heard a voice, which
said:

          ‘Let down, let down thy petticoat
           That lets thy feet be seen.’

She turned round in surprise, and then she saw the little creature, the
Golden Crab.

‘What! You can speak, can you, you ridiculous crab?’ she said, for she
was not quite pleased at the Crab’s remarks. Then she took him up and
placed him on a dish.

When her husband came home and they sat down to dinner, they presently
heard the Crab’s little voice saying, ‘Give me some too.’ They were all
very much surprised, but they gave him something to eat. When the old
man came to take away the plate which had contained the Crab’s dinner,
he found it full of gold, and as the same thing happened every day he
soon became very fond of the Crab.

One day the Crab said to the fisherman’s wife, ‘Go to the King and tell
him I wish to marry his younger daughter.’

The old woman went accordingly, and laid the matter before the King, who
laughed a little at the notion of his daughter marrying a crab, but did
not decline the proposal altogether, because he was a prudent monarch,
and knew that the Crab was likely to be a prince in disguise. He said,
therefore, to the fisherman’s wife, ‘Go, old woman, and tell the Crab I
will give him my daughter if by to-morrow morning he can build a wall in
front of my castle much higher than my tower, upon which all the flowers
of the world must grow and bloom.’

The fisherman’s wife went home and gave this message.

Then the Crab gave her a golden rod, and said, ‘Go and strike with this
rod three times upon the ground on the place which the King showed you,
and to-morrow morning the wall will be there.’

The old woman did so and went away again.

The next morning, when the King awoke, what do you think he saw? The
wall stood there before his eyes, exactly as he had bespoken it!

Then the old woman went back to the King and said to him, ‘Your
Majesty’s orders have been fulfilled.’

‘That is all very well,’ said the King, ‘but I cannot give away my
daughter until there stands in front of my palace a garden in which
there are three fountains, of which the first must play gold, the second
diamonds, and the third brilliants.’

So the old woman had to strike again three times upon the ground with
the rod, and the next morning the garden was there. The King now gave
his consent, and the wedding was fixed for the very next day.

Then the Crab said to the old fisherman, ‘Now take this rod; go and
knock with it on a certain mountain; then a black man(6) will come out
and ask you what you wish for. Answer him thus: ‘’Your master, the King,
has sent me to tell you that you must send him his golden garment that
is like the sun.’’ Make him give you, besides, the queenly robes of gold
and precious stones which are like the flowery meadows, and bring them
both to me. And bring me also the golden cushion.’

(6) Ein Mohr.


The old man went and did his errand. When he had brought the precious
robes, the Crab put on the golden garment and then crept upon the golden
cushion, and in this way the fisherman carried him to the castle, where
the Crab presented the other garment to his bride. Now the ceremony
took place, and when the married pair were alone together the Crab made
himself known to his young wife, and told her how he was the son of the
greatest king in the world, and how he was enchanted, so that he became
a crab by day and was a man only at night; and he could also change
himself into an eagle as often as he wished. No sooner had he said this
than he shook himself, and immediately became a handsome youth, but the
next morning he was forced to creep back again into his crab-shell. And
the same thing happened every day. But the Princess’s affection for the
Crab, and the polite attention with which she behaved to him, surprised
the royal family very much. They suspected some secret, but though they
spied and spied, they could not discover it. Thus a year passed away,
and the Princess had a son, whom she called Benjamin. But her mother
still thought the whole matter very strange. At last she said to the
King that he ought to ask his daughter whether she would not like to
have another husband instead of the Crab? But when the daughter was
questioned she only answered:

‘I am married to the Crab, and him only will I have.’

Then the King said to her, ‘I will appoint a tournament in your honour,
and I will invite all the princes in the world to it, and if any one of
them pleases you, you shall marry him.’

In the evening the Princess told this to the Crab, who said to her,
‘Take this rod, go to the garden gate and knock with it, then a black
man will come out and say to you, ‘’Why have you called me, and what do
you require of me?’’ Answer him thus: ‘Your master the King has sent me
hither to tell you to send him his golden armour and his steed and the
silver apple.’’ And bring them to me.’

The Princess did so, and brought him what he desired.

The following evening the Prince dressed himself for the tournament.
Before he went he said to his wife, ‘Now mind you do not say when you
see me that I am the Crab. For if you do this evil will come of it.
Place yourself at the window with your sisters; I will ride by and throw
you the silver apple. Take it in your hand, but if they ask you who I
am, say that you do not know.’ So saying, he kissed her, repeated his
warning once more, and went away.

The Princess went with her sisters to the window and looked on at the
tournament. Presently her husband rode by and threw the apple up to her.
She caught it in her hand and went with it to her room, and by-and-by
her husband came back to her. But her father was much surprised that she
did not seem to care about any of the Princes; he therefore appointed a
second tournament.

The Crab then gave his wife the same directions as before, only this
time the apple which she received from the black man was of gold. But
before the Prince went to the tournament he said to his wife, ‘Now I
know you will betray me to-day.’

But she swore to him that she would not tell who he was. He then
repeated his warning and went away.

In the evening, while the Princess, with her mother and sisters, was
standing at the window, the Prince suddenly galloped past on his steed
and threw her the golden apple.

Then her mother flew into a passion, gave her a box on the ear, and
cried out, ‘Does not even that prince please you, you fool?’

The Princess in her fright exclaimed, ‘That is the Crab himself!’

Her mother was still more angry because she had not been told sooner,
ran into her daughter’s room where the crab-shell was still lying, took
it up and threw it into the fire. Then the poor Princess cried bitterly,
but it was of no use; her husband did not come back.

Now we must leave the Princess and turn to the other persons in the
story. One day an old man went to a stream to dip in a crust of bread
which he was going to eat, when a dog came out of the water, snatched
the bread from his hand, and ran away. The old man ran after him,
but the dog reached a door, pushed it open, and ran in, the old man
following him. He did not overtake the dog, but found himself above a
staircase, which he descended. Then he saw before him a stately palace,
and, entering, he found in a large hall a table set for twelve persons.
He hid himself in the hall behind a great picture, that he might see
what would happen. At noon he heard a great noise, so that he trembled
with fear. When he took courage to look out from behind the picture,
he saw twelve eagles flying in. At this sight his fear became still
greater. The eagles flew to the basin of a fountain that was there and
bathed themselves, when suddenly they were changed into twelve handsome
youths. Now they seated themselves at the table, and one of them took
up a goblet filled with wine, and said, ‘A health to my father!’ And
another said, ‘A health to my mother!’ and so the healths went round.
Then one of them said:

     ‘A health to my dearest lady,
           Long may she live and well!
       But a curse on the cruel mother
           That burnt my golden shell!’

And so saying he wept bitterly. Then the youths rose from the table,
went back to the great stone fountain, turned themselves into eagles
again, and flew away.

Then the old man went away too, returned to the light of day, and went
home. Soon after he heard that the Princess was ill, and that the only
thing that did her good was having stories told to her. He therefore
went to the royal castle, obtained an audience of the Princess, and told
her about the strange things he had seen in the underground palace. No
sooner had he finished than the Princess asked him whether he could find
the way to that palace.

‘Yes,’ he answered, ‘certainly.’

And now she desired him to guide her thither at once. The old man did
so, and when they came to the palace he hid her behind the great picture
and advised her to keep quite still, and he placed himself behind
the picture also. Presently the eagles came flying in, and changed
themselves into young men, and in a moment the Princess recognised her
husband amongst them all, and tried to come out of her hiding-place; but
the old man held her back. The youths seated themselves at the table;
and now the Prince said again, while he took up the cup of wine:

     ‘A health to my dearest lady,
           Long may she live and well!
       But a curse on the cruel mother
           That burnt my golden shell!’

Then the Princess could restrain herself no longer, but ran forward and
threw her arms round her husband. And immediately he knew her again, and
said:

‘Do you remember how I told you that day that you would betray me?
Now you see that I spoke the truth. But all that bad time is past. Now
listen to me: I must still remain enchanted for three months. Will you
stay here with me till that time is over?’

So the Princess stayed with him, and said to the old man, ‘Go back to
the castle and tell my parents that I am staying here.’

Her parents were very much vexed when the old man came back and told
them this, but as soon as the three months of the Prince’s enchantment
were over, he ceased to be an eagle and became once more a man, and they
returned home together. And then they lived happily, and we who hear the
story are happier still.




THE IRON STOVE(7)

(7) Grimm.

Once upon a time when wishes came true there was a king’s son who was
enchanted by an old witch, so that he was obliged to sit in a large iron
stove in a wood. There he lived for many years, and no one could free
him. At last a king’s daughter came into the wood; she had lost her way,
and could not find her father’s kingdom again. She had been wandering
round and round for nine days, and she came at last to the iron case. A
voice came from within and asked her, ‘Where do you come from, and where
do you want to go?’ She answered, ‘I have lost my way to my father’s
kingdom, and I shall never get home again.’ Then the voice from the iron
stove said, ‘I will help you to find your home again, and that in a very
short time, if you will promise to do what I ask you. I am a greater
prince than you are a princess, and I will marry you.’ Then she grew
frightened, and thought, ‘What can a young lassie do with an iron
stove?’ But as she wanted very much to go home to her father, she
promised to do what he wished.

He said, ‘You must come again, and bring a knife with you to scrape a
hole in the iron.’

Then he gave her someone for a guide, who walked near her and said
nothing, but he brought her in two hours to her house. There was great
joy in the castle when the Princess came back, and the old King fell on
her neck and kissed her. But she was very much troubled, and said, ‘Dear
father, listen to what has befallen me! I should never have come home
again out of the great wild wood if I had not come to an iron stove,
to whom I have had to promise that I will go back to free him and marry
him!’ The old King was so frightened that he nearly fainted, for she was
his only daughter. So they consulted together, and determined that the
miller’s daughter, who was very beautiful, should take her place. They
took her there, gave her a knife, and said she must scrape at the iron
stove. She scraped for twenty-four hours, but did not make the least
impression. When the day broke, a voice called from the iron stove, ‘It
seems to me that it is day outside.’ Then she answered, ‘It seems so to
me; I think I hear my father’s mill rattling.’

‘So you are a miller’s daughter! Then go away at once, and tell the
King’s daughter to come.’

Then she went away, and told the old King that the thing inside the
iron stove would not have her, but wanted the Princess. The old King was
frightened, and his daughter wept. But they had a swineherd’s daughter
who was even more beautiful than the miller’s daughter, and they gave
her a piece of gold to go to the iron stove instead of the Princess.
Then she was taken out, and had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours, but
she could make no impression. As soon as the day broke the voice from
the stove called out, ‘It seems to be daylight outside.’ Then she
answered, ‘It seems so to me too; I think I hear my father blowing his
horn.’ ‘So you are a swineherd’s daughter! Go away at once, and let the
King’s daughter come. And say to her that what I foretell shall come to
pass, and if she does not come everything in the kingdom shall fall into
ruin, and not one stone shall be left upon another.’ When the Princess
heard this she began to cry, but it was no good; she had to keep her
word. She took leave of her father, put a knife in her belt, and went
to the iron stove in the wood. As soon as she reached it she began to
scrape, and the iron gave way and before two hours had passed she had
made a little hole. Then she peeped in and saw such a beautiful youth
all shining with gold and precious stones that she fell in love with him
on the spot. So she scraped away harder than ever, and made the hole
so large that he could get out. Then he said, ‘You are mine, and I am
thine; you are my bride and have set me free!’ He wanted to take her
with him to his kingdom, but she begged him just to let her go once more
to her father; and the Prince let her go, but told her not to say more
than three words to her father, then to come back again. So she went
home, but alas! she said MORE THAN THREE WORDS; and immediately the iron
stove vanished and went away over a mountain of glass and sharp swords.
But the Prince was free, and was no longer shut up in it. Then she said
good-bye to her father, and took a little money with her, and went again
into the great wood to look for the iron stove; but she could not find
it. She sought it for nine days, and then her hunger became so great
that she did not know how she could live any longer. And when it was
evening she climbed a little tree and wished that the night would not
come, because she was afraid of the wild beasts. When midnight came she
saw afar off a little light, and thought, ‘Ah! if only I could reach
that!’ Then she got down from the tree and went towards the light. She
came to a little old house with a great deal of grass growing round, and
stood in front of a little heap of wood. She thought, ‘Alas! what am I
coming to?’ and peeped through the window; but she saw nothing inside
except big and little toads, and a table beautifully spread with roast
meats and wine, and all the dishes and drinking-cups were of silver.
Then she took heart and knocked. Then a fat toad called out:

          ‘Little green toad with leg like crook,
           Open wide the door, and look
           Who it was the latch that shook.’

And a little toad came forward and let her in. When she entered they
all bid her welcome, and made her sit down. They asked her how she came
there and what she wanted. Then she told everything that had happened
to her, and how, because she had exceeded her permission only to speak
three words, the stove had disappeared with the Prince; and how she had
searched a very long time, and must wander over mountain and valley till
she found him.

Then the old toad said:

          ‘Little green toad whose leg doth twist,
           Go to the corner of which you wist,
           And bring to me the large old kist.’

And the little toad went and brought out a great chest. Then they gave
her food and drink, and led her to a beautifully made bed of silk and
samite, on which she lay down and slept soundly. When the day dawned she
arose, and the old toad gave her three things out of the huge chest to
take with her. She would have need of them, for she had to cross a high
glass mountain, three cutting swords, and a great lake. When she had
passed these she would find her lover again. So she was given three
large needles, a plough-wheel, and three nuts, which she was to take
great care of. She set out with these things, and when she came to the
glass mountain which was so slippery she stuck the three needles behind
her feet and then in front, and so got over it, and when she was on the
other side put them carefully away.

Then she reached the three cutting swords, and got on her plough-wheel
and rolled over them. At last she came to a great lake, and, when she
had crossed that, arrived at a beautiful castle. She went in and gave
herself out as a servant, a poor maid who would gladly be engaged. But
she knew that the Prince whom she had freed from the iron stove in the
great wood was in the castle. So she was taken on as a kitchen-maid for
very small wages. Now the Prince was about to marry another princess,
for he thought she was dead long ago.

In the evening, when she had washed up and was ready, she felt in her
pocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had given her. She
cracked one and was going to eat the kernel, when behold! there was a
beautiful royal dress inside it! When the bride heard of this, she came
and begged for the dress, and wanted to buy it, saying that it was not a
dress for a serving-maid. Then she said she would not sell it unless she
was granted one favour--namely, to sleep by the Prince’s door. The bride
granted her this, because the dress was so beautiful and she had so few
like it. When it was evening she said to her bridegroom, ‘That stupid
maid wants to sleep by your door.’

‘If you are contented, I am,’ he said. But she gave him a glass of wine
in which she had poured a sleeping-draught. Then they both went to his
room, but he slept so soundly that she could not wake him. The maid wept
all night long, and said, ‘I freed you in the wild wood out of the iron
stove; I have sought you, and have crossed a glassy mountain, three
sharp swords, and a great lake before I found you, and will you not hear
me now?’ The servants outside heard how she cried the whole night, and
they told their master in the morning.

When she had washed up the next evening she bit the second nut, and
there was a still more beautiful dress inside. When the bride saw it she
wanted to buy it also. But the maid did not want money, and asked that
she should sleep again by the Prince’s door. The bride, however, gave
him a sleeping-draught, and he slept so soundly that he heard nothing.
But the kitchen-maid wept the whole night long, and said, ‘I have freed
you in a wood and from an iron stove; I sought you and have crossed a
glassy mountain, three sharp swords, and a great lake to find you, and
now you will not hear me!’ The servants outside heard how she cried the
whole night, and in the morning they told their master.

And when she had washed up on the third night she bit the third nut,
and there was a still more beautiful dress inside that was made of pure
gold. When the bride saw it she wanted to have it, but the maid would
only give it her on condition that she should sleep for the third
time by the Prince’s door. But the Prince took care not to drink
the sleeping-draught. When she began to weep and to say, ‘Dearest
sweetheart, I freed you in the horrible wild wood, and from an iron
stove,’ he jumped up and said, ‘You are right. You are mine, and I am
thine.’ Though it was still night, he got into a carriage with her, and
they took the false bride’s clothes away, so that she could not follow
them. When they came to the great lake they rowed across, and when they
reached the three sharp swords they sat on the plough-wheel, and on the
glassy mountain they stuck the three needles in. So they arrived at last
at the little old house, but when they stepped inside it turned into
a large castle. The toads were all freed, and were beautiful King’s
children, running about for joy. There they were married, and they
remained in the castle, which was much larger than that of the
Princess’s father’s. But because the old man did not like being left
alone, they went and fetched him. So they had two kingdoms and lived in
great wealth.

          A mouse has run,
           My story’s done.




THE DRAGON AND HIS GRANDMOTHER

There was once a great war, and the King had a great many soldiers, but
he gave them so little pay that they could not live upon it. Then three
of them took counsel together and determined to desert.

One of them said to the others, ‘If we are caught, we shall be hanged
on the gallows; how shall we set about it?’ The other said, ‘Do you see
that large cornfield there? If we were to hide ourselves in that, no
one could find us. The army cannot come into it, and to-morrow it is to
march on.’

They crept into the corn, but the army did not march on, but remained
encamped close around them. They sat for two days and two nights in
the corn, and grew so hungry that they nearly died; but if they were to
venture out, it was certain death.

They said at last, ‘What use was it our deserting? We must perish here
miserably.’

Whilst they were speaking a fiery dragon came flying through the air. It
hovered near them, and asked why they were hidden there.

They answered, ‘We are three soldiers, and have deserted because our pay
was so small. Now if we remain here we shall die of hunger, and if we
move out we shall be strung up on the gallows.’

‘If you will serve me for seven years,’ said the dragon, I will lead you
through the midst of the army so that no one shall catch you.’ ‘We have
no choice, and must take your offer,’ said they. Then the dragon seized
them in his claws, took them through the air over the army, and set them
down on the earth a long way from it.

He gave them a little whip, saying, ‘Whip and slash with this, and as
much money as you want will jump up before you. You can then live as
great lords, keep horses, and drive about in carriages. But after seven
years you are mine.’ Then he put a book before them, which he made all
three of them sign. ‘I will then give you a riddle,’ he said; ‘if you
guess it, you shall be free and out of my power.’ The dragon then flew
away, and they journeyed on with their little whip. They had as much
money as they wanted, wore grand clothes, and made their way into the
world. Wherever they went they lived in merrymaking and splendour, drove
about with horses and carriages, ate and drank, but did nothing wrong.

The time passed quickly away, and when the seven years were nearly ended
two of them grew terribly anxious and frightened, but the third
made light of it, saying, ‘Don’t be afraid, brothers, I wasn’t born
yesterday; I will guess the riddle.’

They went into a field, sat down, and the two pulled long faces. An old
woman passed by, and asked them why they were so sad. ‘Alas! what have
you to do with it? You cannot help us.’ ‘Who knows?’ she answered. ‘Only
confide your trouble in me.’

Then they told her that they had become the servants of the Dragon for
seven long years, and how he had given them money as plentifully as
blackberries; but as they had signed their names they were his, unless
when the seven years had passed they could guess a riddle. The old woman
said, ‘If you would help yourselves, one of you must go into the wood,
and there he will come upon a tumble-down building of rocks which looks
like a little house. He must go in, and there he will find help.’

The two melancholy ones thought, ‘That won’t save us!’ and they remained
where they were. But the third and merry one jumped up and went into the
wood till he found the rock hut. In the hut sat a very old woman, who
was the Dragon’s grandmother. She asked him how he came, and what was
his business there. He told her all that happened, and because she was
pleased with him she took compassion on him, and said she would help
him.

She lifted up a large stone which lay over the cellar, saying, ‘Hide
yourself there; you can hear all that is spoken in this room. Only sit
still and don’t stir. When the Dragon comes, I will ask him what the
riddle is, for he tells me everything; then listen carefully what he
answers.’

At midnight the Dragon flew in, and asked for his supper. His
grandmother laid the table, and brought out food and drink till he was
satisfied, and they ate and drank together. Then in the course of the
conversation she asked him what he had done in the day, and how many
souls he had conquered.

‘I haven’t had much luck to-day,’ he said, ‘but I have a tight hold on
three soldiers.’

‘Indeed! three soldiers!’ said she. ‘Who cannot escape you?’

‘They are mine,’ answered the Dragon scornfully, ‘for I shall only give
them one riddle which they will never be able to guess.’

‘What sort of a riddle is it?’ she asked.

‘I will tell you this. In the North Sea lies a dead sea-cat--that shall
be their roast meat; and the rib of a whale--that shall be their
silver spoon; and the hollow foot of a dead horse--that shall be their
wineglass.’

When the Dragon had gone to bed, his old grandmother pulled up the stone
and let out the soldier.

‘Did you pay attention to everything?’

‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘I know enough, and can help myself splendidly.’

Then he went by another way through the window secretly, and in all
haste back to his comrades. He told them how the Dragon had been
outwitted by his grandmother, and how he had heard from his own lips the
answer to the riddle.

Then they were all delighted and in high spirits, took out their whip,
and cracked so much money that it came jumping up from the ground.
When the seven years had quite gone, the Fiend came with his book, and,
pointing at the signatures, said, ‘I will take you underground with me;
you shall have a meal there. If you can tell me what you will get for
your roast meat, you shall be free, and shall also keep the whip.’

Then said the first soldier, ‘In the North Sea lies a dead sea-cat; that
shall be the roast meat.’

The Dragon was much annoyed, and hummed and hawed a good deal, and asked
the second, ‘But what shall be your spoon?’

‘The rib of a whale shall be our silver spoon.’

The Dragon-made a face, and growled again three times, ‘Hum, hum, hum,’
and said to the third, ‘Do you know what your wineglass shall be?’

‘An old horse’s hoof shall be our wineglass.’

Then the Dragon flew away with a loud shriek, and had no more power over
them. But the three soldiers took the little whip, whipped as much money
as they wanted, and lived happily to their lives end.



THE DONKEY CABBAGE

There was once a young Hunter who went boldly into the forest. He had a
merry and light heart, and as he went whistling along there came an ugly
old woman, who said to him, ‘Good-day, dear hunter! You are very merry
and contented, but I suffer hunger and thirst, so give me a trifle.’ The
Hunter was sorry for the poor old woman, and he felt in his pocket and
gave her all he could spare. He was going on then, but the old woman
stopped him and said, ‘Listen, dear hunter, to what I say. Because of
your kind heart I will make you a present. Go on your way, and in a
short time you will come to a tree on which sit nine birds who have a
cloak in their claws and are quarrelling over it. Then take aim with
your gun and shoot in the middle of them; they will let the cloak fall,
but one of the birds will be hit and will drop down dead. Take the cloak
with you; it is a wishing-cloak, and when you throw it on your shoulders
you have only to wish yourself at a certain place, and in the twinkling
of an eye you are there. Take the heart out of the dead bird and swallow
it whole, and early every morning when you get up you will find a gold
piece under your pillow.’

The Hunter thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself ‘These are
splendid things she has promised me, if only they come to pass!’ So
he walked on about a hundred yards, and then he heard above him in the
branches such a screaming and chirping that he looked up, and there
he saw a heap of birds tearing a cloth with their beaks and feet,
shrieking, tugging, and fighting, as if each wanted it for himself.
‘Well,’ said the Hunter, ‘this is wonderful! It is just as the old woman
said’; and he took his gun on his shoulder, pulled the trigger, and
shot into the midst of them, so that their feathers flew about. Then the
flock took flight with much screaming, but one fell dead, and the cloak
fluttered down. Then the Hunter did as the old woman had told him: he
cut open the bird, found its heart, swallowed it, and took the cloak
home with him. The next morning when he awoke he remembered the promise,
and wanted to see if it had come true. But when he lifted up his pillow,
there sparkled the gold piece, and the next morning he found another,
and so on every time he got up. He collected a heap of gold, but at
last he thought to himself, ‘What good is all my gold to me if I stay
at home? I will travel and look a bit about me in the world.’ So he took
leave of his parents, slung his hunting knapsack and his gun round him,
and journeyed into the world.

It happened that one day he went through a thick wood, and when he came
to the end of it there lay in the plain before him a large castle. At
one of the windows in it stood an old woman with a most beautiful maiden
by her side, looking out. But the old woman was a witch, and she said to
the girl, ‘There comes one out of the wood who has a wonderful treasure
in his body which we must manage to possess ourselves of, darling
daughter; we have more right to it than he. He has a bird’s heart in
him, and so every morning there lies a gold piece under his pillow.’

She told her how they could get hold of it, and how she was to coax it
from him, and at last threatened her angrily, saying, ‘And if you do not
obey me, you shall repent it!’

When the Hunter came nearer he saw the maiden, and said to himself, ‘I
have travelled so far now that I will rest, and turn into this beautiful
castle; money I have in plenty.’ But the real reason was that he had
caught sight of the lovely face.

He went into the house, and was kindly received and hospitably
entertained. It was not long before he was so much in love with the
witch-maiden that he thought of nothing else, and only looked in her
eyes, and whatever she wanted, that he gladly did. Then the old witch
said, ‘Now we must have the bird-heart; he will not feel when it is
gone.’ She prepared a drink, and when it was ready she poured it in a
goblet and gave it to the maiden, who had to hand it to the hunter.

‘Drink to me now, my dearest,’ she said. Then he took the goblet, and
when he had swallowed the drink the bird-heart came out of his mouth.
The maiden had to get hold of it secretly and then swallow it herself,
for the old witch wanted to have it. Thenceforward he found no more gold
under his pillow, and it lay under the maiden’s; but he was so much in
love and so much bewitched that he thought of nothing except spending
all his time with the maiden.

Then the old witch said, ‘We have the bird-heart, but we must also get
the wishing-cloak from him.’

The maiden answered, ‘We will leave him that; he has already lost his
wealth!’

The old witch grew angry, and said, ‘Such a cloak is a wonderful thing,
it is seldom to be had in the world, and have it I must and will.’ She
beat the maiden, and said that if she did not obey it would go ill with
her.

So she did her mother’s bidding, and, standing one day by the window,
she looked away into the far distance as if she were very sad.

‘Why are you standing there looking so sad?’ asked the Hunter.

‘Alas, my love,’ she replied, ‘over there lies the granite mountain
where the costly precious stones grow. I have a great longing to go
there, so that when I think of it I am very sad. For who can fetch them?
Only the birds who fly; a man, never.’

‘If you have no other trouble,’ said the Hunter, ‘that one I can easily
remove from your heart.’

So he wrapped her round in his cloak and wished themselves to the
granite mountain, and in an instant there they were, sitting on it! The
precious stones sparkled so brightly on all sides that it was a pleasure
to see them, and they collected the most beautiful and costly together.
But now the old witch had through her caused the Hunter’s eyes to become
heavy.

He said to the maiden, ‘We will sit down for a little while and rest; I
am so tired that I can hardly stand on my feet.’

So they sat down, and he laid his head on her lap and fell asleep. As
soon as he was sound asleep she unfastened the cloak from his shoulders,
threw it on her own, left the granite and stones, and wished herself
home again.

But when the Hunter had finished his sleep and awoke, he found that his
love had betrayed him and left him alone on the wild mountain. ‘Oh,’
said he, ‘why is faithlessness so great in the world?’ and he sat down
in sorrow and trouble, not knowing what to do.

But the mountain belonged to fierce and huge giants, who lived on it
and traded there, and he had not sat long before he saw three of them
striding towards him. So he lay down as if he had fallen into a deep
sleep.

The giants came up, and the first pushed him with his foot, and said,
‘What sort of an earthworm is that?’

The second said, ‘Crush him dead.’

But the third said contemptuously, ‘It is not worth the trouble! Let him
live; he cannot remain here, and if he goes higher up the mountain the
clouds will take him and carry him off.’

Talking thus they went away. But the Hunter had listened to their talk,
and as soon as they had gone he rose and climbed to the summit. When he
had sat there a little while a cloud swept by, and, seizing him, carried
him away. It travelled for a time in the sky, and then it sank down and
hovered over a large vegetable garden surrounded by walls, so that he
came safely to the ground amidst cabbages and vegetables. The Hunter
then looked about him, saying, ‘If only I had something to eat! I am so
hungry, and it will go badly with me in the future, for I see here
not an apple or pear or fruit of any kind--nothing but vegetables
everywhere.’ At last he thought, ‘At a pinch I can eat a salad; it does
not taste particularly nice, but it will refresh me.’ So he looked about
for a good head and ate it, but no sooner had he swallowed a couple
of mouthfuls than he felt very strange, and found himself wonderfully
changed. Four legs began to grow on him, a thick head, and two long
ears, and he saw with horror that he had changed into a donkey. But as
he was still very hungry and this juicy salad tasted very good to his
present nature, he went on eating with a still greater appetite. At last
he got hold of another kind of cabbage, but scarcely had swallowed it
when he felt another change, and he once more regained his human form.

The Hunter now lay down and slept off his weariness. When he awoke
the next morning he broke off a head of the bad and a head of the good
cabbage, thinking, ‘This will help me to regain my own, and to punish
faithlessness.’ Then he put the heads in his pockets, climbed the wall,
and started off to seek the castle of his love. When he had wandered
about for a couple of days he found it quite easily. He then browned his
face quickly, so that his own mother would not have known him, and went
into the castle, where he begged for a lodging.

‘I am so tired,’ he said, ‘I can go no farther.’

The witch asked, ‘Countryman, who are you, and what is your business?’

He answered, ‘I am a messenger of the King, and have been sent to seek
the finest salad that grows under the sun. I have been so lucky as to
find it, and am bringing it with me; but the heat of the sun is so great
that the tender cabbage threatens to grow soft, and I do not know if I
shall be able to bring it any farther.’

When the old witch heard of the fine salad she wanted to eat it, and
said, ‘Dear countryman, just let me taste the wonderful salad.’

‘Why not?’ he answered; ‘I have brought two heads with me, and will give
you one.’

So saying, he opened his sack and gave her the bad one. The witch
suspected no evil, and her mouth watered to taste the new dish, so that
she went into the kitchen to prepare it herself. When it was ready she
could not wait till it was served at the table, but she immediately took
a couple of leaves and put them in her mouth. No sooner, however, had
she swallowed them than she lost human form, and ran into the courtyard
in the shape of a donkey.

Now the servant came into the kitchen, and when she saw the salad
standing there ready cooked she was about to carry it up, but on the
way, according to her old habit, she tasted it and ate a couple of
leaves. Immediately the charm worked, and she became a donkey, and ran
out to join the old witch, and the dish with the salad in it fell to
the ground. In the meantime, the messenger was sitting with the lovely
maiden, and as no one came with the salad, and she wanted very much to
taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad is.’

Then thought the Hunter, ‘The cabbage must have already begun to work.’
And he said, ‘I will go to the kitchen and fetch it myself.’

When he came there he saw the two donkeys running about in the
courtyard, but the salad was lying on the ground.

‘That’s all right,’ said he; ‘two have had their share!’ And lifting the
remaining leaves up, he laid them on the dish and brought them to the
maiden.

‘I am bringing you the delicious food my own self,’ he said, ‘so that
you need not wait any longer.’

Then she ate, and, as the others had done, she at once lost her human
form, and ran as a donkey into the yard.

When the Hunter had washed his face, so that the changed ones might know
him, he went into the yard, saying, ‘Now you shall receive a reward for
your faithlessness.’

He tied them all three with a rope, and drove them away till he came to
a mill. He knocked at the window, and the miller put his head out and
asked what he wanted.

‘I have three tiresome animals,’ he answered, ‘which I don’t want to
keep any longer. If you will take them, give them food and stabling, and
do as I tell you with them, I will pay you as much as you want.’

The miller replied, ‘Why not? What shall I do with them?’

Then the Hunter said that to the old donkey, which was the witch, three
beatings and one meal; to the younger one, which was the servant, one
beating and three meals; and to the youngest one, which was the maiden,
no beating and three meals; for he could not find it in his heart to let
the maiden be beaten.

Then he went back into the castle, and he found there all that he
wanted. After a couple of days the miller came and said that he must
tell him that the old donkey which was to have three beatings and only
one meal had died. ‘The two others,’ he added, ‘are certainly not dead,
and get their three meals every day, but they are so sad that they
cannot last much longer.’

Then the Hunter took pity on them, laid aside his anger, and told the
miller to drive them back again. And when they came he gave them some
of the good cabbage to eat, so that they became human again. Then the
beautiful maiden fell on her knees before him, saying, ‘Oh, my dearest,
forgive me the ill I have done you! My mother compelled me to do it;
it was against my will, for I love you dearly. Your wishing-cloak is
hanging in a cupboard, and as for the bird-heart I will make a drink and
give it back to you.’

But he changed his mind, and said, ‘Keep it; it makes no difference, for
I will take you to be my own dear true wife.’

And the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happy together till
death.




 THE LITTLE GREEN FROG(8)

(8) Cabinet des Fees.

In a part of the world whose name I forget lived once upon a time two
kings, called Peridor and Diamantino. They were cousins as well as
neighbours, and both were under the protection of the fairies; though it
is only fair to say that the fairies did not love them half so well as
their wives did.

Now it often happens that as princes can generally manage to get their
own way it is harder for them to be good than it is for common people.
So it was with Peridor and Diamantino; but of the two, the fairies
declared that Diamantino was much the worst; indeed, he behaved so badly
to his wife Aglantino, that the fairies would not allow him to live any
longer; and he died, leaving behind him a little daughter. As she was an
only child, of course this little girl was the heiress of the kingdom,
but, being still only a baby, her mother, the widow of Diamantino, was
proclaimed regent. The Queen-dowager was wise and good, and tried her
best to make her people happy. The only thing she had to vex her was
the absence of her daughter; for the fairies, for reasons of their own,
determined to bring up the little Princess Serpentine among themselves.

As to the other King, he was really fond of his wife, Queen Constance,
but he often grieved her by his thoughtless ways, and in order to punish
him for his carelessness, the fairies caused her to die quite suddenly.
When she was gone the King felt how much he had loved her, and his grief
was so great (though he never neglected his duties) that his subjects
called him Peridor the Sorrowful. It seems hardly possible that any
man should live like Peridor for fifteen years plunged in such depth of
grief, and most likely he would have died too if it had not been for the
fairies.

The one comfort the poor King had was his son, Prince Saphir, who was
only three years old at the time of his mother’s death, and great care
was given to his education. By the time he was fifteen Saphir had learnt
everything that a prince should know, and he was, besides, charming and
agreeable.

It was about this time that the fairies suddenly took fright lest his
love for his father should interfere with the plans they had made for
the young prince. So, to prevent this, they placed in a pretty little
room of which Saphir was very fond a little mirror in a black frame,
such as were often brought from Venice. The Prince did not notice
for some days that there was anything new in the room, but at last
he perceived it, and went up to look at it more closely. What was his
surprise to see reflected in the mirror, not his own face, but that of
a young girl as lovely as the morning! And, better still, every movement
of the girl, just growing out of childhood, was also reflected in the
wonderful glass.

As might have been expected, the young Prince lost his heart completely
to the beautiful image, and it was impossible to get him out of the
room, so busy was he in watching the lovely unknown. Certainly it was
very delightful to be able to see her whom he loved at any moment he
chose, but his spirits sometimes sank when he wondered what was to be
the end of this adventure.

The magic mirror had been for about a year in the Prince’s possession,
when one day a new subject of disquiet seized upon him. As usual, he was
engaged in looking at the girl, when suddenly he thought he saw a second
mirror reflected in the first, exactly like his own, and with the same
power. And in this he was perfectly right. The young girl had only
possessed it for a short time, and neglected all her duties for the sake
of the mirror. Now it was not difficult for Saphir to guess the reason
of the change in her, nor why the new mirror was consulted so often;
but try as he would he could never see the face of the person who was
reflected in it, for the young girl’s figure always came between. All he
knew was that the face was that of a man, and this was quite enough to
make him madly jealous. This was the doing of the fairies, and we must
suppose that they had their reasons for acting as they did.

When these things happened Saphir was about eighteen years old, and
fifteen years had passed away since the death of his mother. King
Peridor had grown more and more unhappy as time went on, and at last he
fell so ill that it seemed as if his days were numbered. He was so much
beloved by his subjects that this sad news was heard with despair by the
nation, and more than all by the Prince.

During his whole illness the King never spoke of anything but the Queen,
his sorrow at having grieved her, and his hope of one day seeing her
again. All the doctors and all the water-cures in the kingdom had been
tried, and nothing would do him any good. At last he persuaded them to
let him lie quietly in his room, where no one came to trouble him.

Perhaps the worst pain he had to bear was a sort of weight on his chest,
which made it very hard for him to breathe. So he commanded his servants
to leave the windows open in order that he might get more air. One day,
when he had been left alone for a few minutes, a bird with brilliant
plumage came and fluttered round the window, and finally rested on the
sill. His feathers were sky-blue and gold, his feet and his beak of such
glittering rubies that no one could bear to look at them, his eyes made
the brightest diamonds look dull, and on his head he wore a crown. I
cannot tell you what the crown was made of, but I am quite certain that
it was still more splendid than all the rest. As to his voice I can
say nothing about that, for the bird never sang at all. In fact, he did
nothing but gaze steadily at the King, and as he gazed, the King felt
his strength come back to him. In a little while the bird flew into the
room, still with his eyes fixed on the King, and at every glance the
strength of the sick man became greater, till he was once more as well
as he used to be before the Queen died. Filled with joy at his cure,
he tried to seize the bird to whom he owed it all, but, swifter than a
swallow, it managed to avoid him. In vain he described the bird to
his attendants, who rushed at his first call; in vain they sought the
wonderful creature both on horse and foot, and summoned the fowlers to
their aid: the bird could nowhere be found. The love the people bore
King Peridor was so strong, and the reward he promised was so large,
that in the twinkling of an eye every man, woman, and child had fled
into the fields, and the towns were quite empty.

All this bustle, however, ended in nothing but confusion, and, what
was worse, the King soon fell back into the same condition as he was in
before. Prince Saphir, who loved his father very dearly, was so unhappy
at this that he persuaded himself that he might succeed where the others
had failed, and at once prepared himself for a more distant search.
In spite of the opposition he met with, he rode away, followed by his
household, trusting to chance to help him. He had formed no plan, and
there was no reason that he should choose one path more than another.
His only idea was to make straight for those spots which were the
favourite haunts of birds. But in vain he examined all the hedges and
all the thickets; in vain he questioned everyone he met along the road.
The more he sought the less he found.

At last he came to one of the largest forests in all the world, composed
entirely of cedars. But in spite of the deep shadows cast by the
wide-spreading branches of the trees, the grass underneath was soft and
green, and covered with the rarest flowers. It seemed to Saphir that
this was exactly the place where the birds would choose to live, and
he determined not to quit the wood until he had examined it from end to
end. And he did more. He ordered some nets to be prepared and painted of
the same colours as the bird’s plumage, thinking that we are all easily
caught by what is like ourselves. In this he had to help him not only
the fowlers by profession, but also his attendants, who excelled in this
art. For a man is not a courtier unless he can do everything.

After searching as usual for nearly a whole day Prince Saphir began
to feel overcome with thirst. He was too tired to go any farther,
when happily he discovered a little way off a bubbling fountain of the
clearest water. Being an experienced traveller, he drew from his pocket
a little cup (without which no one should ever take a journey), and was
just about to dip it in the water, when a lovely little green frog,
much prettier than frogs generally are, jumped into the cup. Far from
admiring its beauty, Saphir shook it impatiently off; but it was no
good, for quick as lightning the frog jumped back again. Saphir, who was
raging with thirst, was just about to shake it off anew, when the little
creature fixed upon him the most beautiful eyes in the world, and said,
‘I am a friend of the bird you are seeking, and when you have quenched
your thirst listen to me.’

So the Prince drank his fill, and then, by the command of the Little
Green Frog, he lay down on the grass to rest himself.

‘Now,’ she began, ‘be sure you do exactly in every respect what I tell
you. First you must call together your attendants, and order them to
remain in a little hamlet close by until you want them. Then go, quite
alone, down a road that you will find on your right hand, looking
southwards. This road is planted all the way with cedars of Lebanon; and
after going down it a long way you will come at last to a magnificent
castle. And now,’ she went on, ‘attend carefully to what I am going to
say. Take this tiny grain of sand, and put it into the ground as close
as you can to the gate of the castle. It has the virtue both of opening
the gate and also of sending to sleep all the inhabitants. Then go at
once to the stable, and pay no heed to anything except what I tell you.
Choose the handsomest of all the horses, leap quickly on its back, and
come to me as fast as you can. Farewell, Prince; I wish you good
luck,’ and with these words the Little Frog plunged into the water and
disappeared.

The Prince, who felt more hopeful than he had done since he left home,
did precisely as he had been ordered. He left his attendants in the
hamlet, found the road the frog had described to him, and followed it
all alone, and at last he arrived at the gate of the castle, which was
even more splendid than he had expected, for it was built of crystal,
and all its ornaments were of massive gold. However, he had no thoughts
to spare for its beauty, and quickly buried his grain of sand in the
earth. In one instant the gates flew open, and all the dwellers inside
fell sound asleep. Saphir flew straight to the stable, and already had
his hand on the finest horse it contained, when his eye was caught by
a suit of magnificent harness hanging up close by. It occurred to
him directly that the harness belonged to the horse, and without ever
thinking of harm (for indeed he who steals a horse can hardly be blamed
for taking his saddle), he hastily placed it on the animal’s back.
Suddenly the people in the castle became broad awake, and rushed to the
stable. They flung themselves on the Prince, seized him, and dragged him
before their lord; but, luckily for the Prince, who could only find very
lame excuses for his conduct, the lord of the castle took a fancy to his
face, and let him depart without further questions.

Very sad, and very much ashamed of himself poor Saphir crept back to the
fountain, where the Frog was awaiting him with a good scolding.

‘Whom do you take me for?’ she exclaimed angrily. ‘Do you really believe
that it was just for the pleasure of talking that I gave you the advice
you have neglected so abominably?’

But the Prince was so deeply grieved, and apologised so very humbly,
that after some time the heart of the good little Frog was softened, and
she gave him another tiny little grain, but instead of being sand it was
now a grain of gold. She directed him to do just as he had done before,
with only this difference, that instead of going to the stable which
had been the ruin of his hopes, he was to enter right into the castle
itself, and to glide as fast as he could down the passages till he came
to a room filled with perfume, where he would find a beautiful maiden
asleep on a bed. He was to wake the maiden instantly and carry her off,
and to be sure not to pay any heed to whatever resistance she might
make.

The Prince obeyed the Frog’s orders one by one, and all went well for
this second time also. The gate opened, the inhabitants fell sound
asleep, and he walked down the passage till he found the girl on her
bed, exactly as he had been told he would. He woke her, and begged her
firmly, but politely, to follow him quickly. After a little persuasion
the maiden consented, but only on condition that she was allowed first
to put on her dress. This sounded so reasonable and natural that it did
not enter the Prince’s head to refuse her request.

But the maiden’s hand had hardly touched the dress when the palace
suddenly awoke from its sleep, and the Prince was seized and bound. He
was so vexed with his own folly, and so taken aback at the disaster,
that he did not attempt to explain his conduct, and things would have
gone badly with him if his friends the fairies had not softened the
hearts of his captors, so that they once more allowed him to leave
quietly. However, what troubled him most was the idea of having to meet
the Frog who had been his benefactress. How was he ever to appear before
her with this tale? Still, after a long struggle with himself, he made
up his mind that there was nothing else to be done, and that he deserved
whatever she might say to him. And she said a great deal, for she had
worked herself into a terrible passion; but the Prince humbly implored
her pardon, and ventured to point out that it would have been very hard
to refuse the young lady’s reasonable request. ‘You must learn to do as
you are told,’ was all the Frog would reply.

But poor Saphir was so unhappy, and begged so hard for forgiveness, that
at last the Frog’s anger gave way, and she held up to him a tiny diamond
stone. ‘Go back,’ she said, ‘to the castle, and bury this little diamond
close to the door. But be careful not to return to the stable or to the
bedroom; they have proved too fatal to you. Walk straight to the garden
and enter through a portico, into a small green wood, in the midst of
which is a tree with a trunk of gold and leaves of emeralds. Perched on
this tree you will see the beautiful bird you have been seeking so long.
You must cut the branch on which it is sitting, and bring it back to
me without delay. But I warn you solemnly that if you disobey my
directions, as you have done twice before, you have nothing more to
expect either of me or anyone else.’

With these words she jumped into the water, and the Prince, who had
taken her threats much to heart, took his departure, firmly resolved not
to deserve them. He found it all just as he had been told: the portico,
the wood, the magnificent tree, and the beautiful bird, which was
sleeping soundly on one of the branches. He speedily lopped off the
branch, and though he noticed a splendid golden cage hanging close by,
which would have been very useful for the bird to travel in, he left it
alone, and came back to the fountain, holding his breath and walking on
tip-toe all the way, for fear lest he should awake his prize. But what
was his surprise, when instead of finding the fountain in the spot where
he had left it, he saw in its place a little rustic palace built in
the best taste, and standing in the doorway a charming maiden, at whose
sight his mind seemed to give way.

‘What! Madam!’ he cried, hardly knowing what he said. ‘What! Is it you?’

The maiden blushed and answered: ‘Ah, my lord, it is long since I first
beheld your face, but I did not think you had ever seen mine.’

‘Oh, madam,’ replied he, ‘you can never guess the days and the hours I
have passed lost in admiration of you.’ And after these words they each
related all the strange things that had happened, and the more they
talked the more they felt convinced of the truth of the images they
had seen in their mirrors. After some time spent in the most tender
conversation, the Prince could not restrain himself from asking the
lovely unknown by what lucky chance she was wandering in the forest;
where the fountain had gone; and if she knew anything of the Frog to
whom he owed all his happiness, and to whom he must give up the bird,
which, somehow or other, was still sound asleep.

‘Ah, my lord,’ she replied, with rather an awkward air, ‘as to the Frog,
she stands before you. Let me tell you my story; it is not a long one. I
know neither my country nor my parents, and the only thing I can say for
certain is that I am called Serpentine. The fairies, who have taken
care of me ever since I was born, wished me to be in ignorance as to my
family, but they have looked after my education, and have bestowed on me
endless kindness. I have always lived in seclusion, and for the last two
years I have wished for nothing better. I had a mirror’--here shyness
and embarrassment choked her words--but regaining her self-control,
she added, ‘You know that fairies insist on being obeyed without
questioning. It was they who changed the little house you saw before you
into the fountain for which you are now asking, and, having turned me
into a frog, they ordered me to say to the first person who came to the
fountain exactly what I repeated to you. But, my lord, when you stood
before me, it was agony to my heart, filled as it was with thoughts of
you, to appear to your eyes under so monstrous a form. However, there
was no help for it, and, painful as it was, I had to submit. I desired
your success with all my soul, not only for your own sake, but also for
my own, because I could not get back my proper shape till you had become
master of the beautiful bird, though I am quite ignorant as to your
reason for seeking it.’

On this Saphir explained about the state of his father’s health, and all
that has been told before.

On hearing this story Serpentine grew very sad, and her lovely eyes
filled with tears.

‘Ah, my lord,’ she said, ‘you know nothing of me but what you have seen
in the mirror; and I, who cannot even name my parents, learn that you
are a king’s son.’

In vain Saphir declared that love made them equal; Serpentine would only
reply: ‘I love you too much to allow you to marry beneath your rank. I
shall be very unhappy, of course, but I shall never alter my mind. If
I do not find from the fairies that my birth is worthy of you, then,
whatever be my feelings, I will never accept your hand.’

The conversation was at this point, and bid fair to last some time
longer, when one of the fairies appeared in her ivory car, accompanied
by a beautiful woman past her early youth. At this moment the bird
suddenly awakened, and, flying on to Saphir’s shoulder (which it never
afterwards left), began fondling him as well as a bird can do. The fairy
told Serpentine that she was quite satisfied with her conduct, and made
herself very agreeable to Saphir, whom she presented to the lady she had
brought with her, explaining that the lady was no other than his Aunt
Aglantine, widow of Diamantino.

Then they all fell into each other’s arms, till the fairy mounted her
chariot, placed Aglantine by her side, and Saphir and Serpentine on the
front seat. She also sent a message to the Prince’s attendants that
they might travel slowly back to the Court of King Peridor, and that
the beautiful bird had really been found. This matter being comfortably
arranged, she started off her chariot. But in spite of the swiftness
with which they flew through the air, the time passed even quicker for
Saphir and Serpentine, who had so much to think about.

They were still quite confused with the pleasure of seeing each other,
when the chariot arrived at King Peridor’s palace. He had had himself
carried to a room on the roof, where his nurses thought that he would
die at any moment. Directly the chariot drew within sight of the castle
the beautiful bird took flight, and, making straight for the dying King,
at once cured him of his sickness. Then she resumed her natural shape,
and he found that the bird was no other than the Queen Constance, whom
he had long believed to be dead. Peridor was rejoiced to embrace his
wife and his son once more, and with the help of the fairies began to
make preparations for the marriage of Saphir and Serpentine, who turned
out to be the daughter of Aglantine and Diamantino, and as much a
princess as he was a prince. The people of the kingdom were delighted,
and everybody lived happy and contented to the end of their lives.




 THE SEVEN-HEADED SERPENT(9)

(9) ‘Die Siebenkopfige Schlange,’ from Schmidt’s Griechische Mahrchen.

Once upon a time there was a king who determined to take a long voyage.
He assembled his fleet and all the seamen, and set out. They went
straight on night and day, until they came to an island which was
covered with large trees, and under every tree lay a lion. As soon as
the King had landed his men, the lions all rose up together and tried
to devour them. After a long battle they managed to overcome the
wild beasts, but the greater number of the men were killed. Those who
remained alive now went on through the forest and found on the other
side of it a beautiful garden, in which all the plants of the world
flourished together.

There were also in the garden three springs: the first flowed with
silver, the second with gold, and the third with pearls. The men
unbuckled their knapsacks and filled them with those precious things. In
the middle of the garden they found a large lake, and when they reached
the edge of it the Lake began to speak, and said to them, ‘What men are
you, and what brings you here? Are you come to visit our king?’ But they
were too much frightened to answer.

Then the Lake said, ‘You do well to be afraid, for it is at your peril
that you are come hither. Our king, who has seven heads, is now asleep,
but in a few minutes he will wake up and come to me to take his bath!
Woe to anyone who meets him in the garden, for it is impossible to
escape from him. This is what you must do if you wish to save your
lives. Take off your clothes and spread them on the path which leads
from here to the castle. The King will then glide over something soft,
which he likes very much, and he will be so pleased with that that he
will not devour you. He will give you some punishment, but then he will
let you go.’

The men did as the Lake advised them, and waited for a time. At noon the
earth began to quake, and opened in many places, and out of the openings
appeared lions, tigers, and other wild beasts, which surrounded the
castle, and thousands and thousands of beasts came out of the castle
following their king, the Seven-headed Serpent. The Serpent glided over
the clothes which were spread for him, came to the Lake, and asked it
who had strewed those soft things on the path? The Lake answered that
it had been done by people who had come to do him homage. The King
commanded that the men should be brought before him. They came humbly on
their knees, and in a few words told him their story. Then he spoke to
them with a mighty and terrible voice, and said, ‘Because you have dared
to come here, I lay upon you the punishment. Every year you must bring
me from among your people twelve youths and twelve maidens, that I may
devour them. If you do not do this, I will destroy your whole nation.’

Then he desired one of his beasts to show the men the way out of the
garden, and dismissed them. They then left the island and went back to
their own country, where they related what had happened to them. Soon
the time came round when the king of the beasts would expect the
youths and maidens to be brought to him. The King therefore issued
a proclamation inviting twelve youths and twelve maidens to offer
themselves up to save their country; and immediately many young people,
far more than enough, hastened to do so. A new ship was built, and set
with black sails, and in it the youths and maidens who were appointed
for the king of the beasts embarked and set out for his country. When
they arrived there they went at once to the Lake, and this time the
lions did not stir, nor did the springs flow, and neither did the Lake
speak. So they waited then, and it was not long before the earth quaked
even more terribly than the first time. The Seven-headed Serpent came
without his train of beasts, saw his prey waiting for him, and devoured
it at one mouthful. Then the ship’s crew returned home, and the same
thing happened yearly until many years had passed.

Now the King of this unhappy country was growing old, and so was the
Queen, and they had no children. One day the Queen was sitting at the
window weeping bitterly because she was childless, and knew that the
crown would therefore pass to strangers after the King’s death. Suddenly
a little old woman appeared before her, holding an apple in her hand,
and said, ‘Why do you weep, my Queen, and what makes you so unhappy?’

‘Alas, good mother,’ answered the Queen, ‘I am unhappy because I have no
children.’

‘Is that what vexes you?’ said the old woman. ‘Listen to me. I am a nun
from the Spinning Convent,(10) and my mother when she died left me this
apple. Whoever eats this apple shall have a child.’

(10) Convent Gnothi.


The Queen gave money to the old woman, and bought the apple from her.
Then she peeled it, ate it, and threw the rind out of the window, and it
so happened that a mare that was running loose in the court below ate up
the rind. After a time the Queen had a little boy, and the mare also had
a male foal. The boy and the foal grew up together and loved each other
like brothers. In course of time the King died, and so did the Queen,
and their son, who was now nineteen years old, was left alone. One day,
when he and his horse were talking together, the Horse said to him,
‘Listen to me, for I love you and wish for your good and that of the
country. If you go on every year sending twelve youths and twelve
maidens to the King of the Beasts, your country will very soon be
ruined. Mount upon my back: I will take you to a woman who can direct
you how to kill the Seven-headed Serpent.’

Then the youth mounted his horse, who carried him far away to a mountain
which was hollow, for in its side was a great underground cavern. In the
cavern sat an old woman spinning. This was the cloister of the nuns, and
the old woman was the Abbess. They all spent their time in spinning, and
that is why the convent has this name. All round the walls of the cavern
there were beds cut out of the solid rock, upon which the nuns slept,
and in the middle a light was burning. It was the duty of the nuns to
watch the light in turns, that it might never go out, and if anyone of
them let it go out the others put her to death.

As soon as the King’s son saw the old Abbess spinning he threw himself
at her feet and entreated her to tell him how he could kill the
Seven-headed Serpent.

She made the youth rise, embraced him, and said, ‘Know, my son, that it
is I who sent the nun to your mother and caused you to be born, and with
you the horse, with whose help you will be able to free the world from
the monster. I will tell you what you have to do. Load your horse with
cotton, and go by a secret passage which I will show you, which is
hidden from the wild beasts, to the Serpent’s palace. You will find the
King asleep upon his bed, which is all hung round with bells, and
over his bed you will see a sword hanging. With this sword only it is
possible to kill the Serpent, because even if its blade breaks a new one
will grow again for every head the monster has. Thus you will be able
to cut off all his seven heads. And this you must also do in order to
deceive the King: you must slip into his bed-chamber very softly, and
stop up all the bells which are round his bed with cotton. Then take
down the sword gently, and quickly give the monster a blow on his tail
with it. This will make him waken up, and if he catches sight of you he
will seize you. But you must quickly cut off his first head, and then
wait till the next one comes up. Then strike it off also, and so go on
till you have cut off all his seven heads.’

The old Abbess then gave the Prince her blessing, and he set out upon
his enterprise, arrived at the Serpent’s castle by following the secret
passage which she had shown him, and by carefully attending to all her
directions he happily succeeded in killing the monster. As soon as
the wild beasts heard of their king’s death, they all hastened to the
castle, but the youth had long since mounted his horse and was already
far out of their reach. They pursued him as fast as they could, but they
found it impossible to overtake him, and he reached home in safety. Thus
he freed his country from this terrible oppression.



THE GRATEFUL BEASTS(11)

(11) From the Hungarian. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a man and woman who had three fine-looking
sons, but they were so poor that they had hardly enough food for
themselves, let alone their children. So the sons determined to set out
into the world and to try their luck. Before starting their mother gave
them each a loaf of bread and her blessing, and having taken a tender
farewell of her and their father the three set forth on their travels.

The youngest of the three brothers, whose name was Ferko, was a
beautiful youth, with a splendid figure, blue eyes, fair hair, and a
complexion like milk and roses. His two brothers were as jealous of him
as they could be, for they thought that with his good looks he would be
sure to be more fortunate than they would ever be.

One day all the three were sitting resting under a tree, for the sun
was hot and they were tired of walking. Ferko fell fast asleep, but the
other two remained awake, and the eldest said to the second brother,
‘What do you say to doing our brother Ferko some harm? He is so
beautiful that everyone takes a fancy to him, which is more than they do
to us. If we could only get him out of the way we might succeed better.’

‘I quite agree with you,’ answered the second brother, ‘and my advice
is to eat up his loaf of bread, and then to refuse to give him a bit
of ours until he has promised to let us put out his eyes or break his
legs.’

His eldest brother was delighted with this proposal, and the two wicked
wretches seized Ferko’s loaf and ate it all up, while the poor boy was
still asleep.

When he did awake he felt very hungry and turned to eat his bread, but
his brothers cried out, ‘You ate your loaf in your sleep, you glutton,
and you may starve as long as you like, but you won’t get a scrap of
ours.’

Ferko was at a loss to understand how he could have eaten in his sleep,
but he said nothing, and fasted all that day and the next night. But
on the following morning he was so hungry that he burst into tears, and
implored his brothers to give him a little bit of their bread. Then the
cruel creatures laughed, and repeated what they had said the day before;
but when Ferko continued to beg and beseech them, the eldest said at
last, ‘If you will let us put out one of your eyes and break one of your
legs, then we will give you a bit of our bread.’

At these words poor Ferko wept more bitterly than before, and bore the
torments of hunger till the sun was high in the heavens; then he could
stand it no longer, and he consented to allow his left eye to be put out
and his left leg to be broken. When this was done he stretched out his
hand eagerly for the piece of bread, but his brothers gave him such a
tiny scrap that the starving youth finished it in a moment and besought
them for a second bit.

But the more Ferko wept and told his brothers that he was dying of
hunger, the more they laughed and scolded him for his greed. So he
endured the pangs of starvation all that day, but when night came his
endurance gave way, and he let his right eye be put out and his right
leg broken for a second piece of bread.

After his brothers had thus successfully maimed and disfigured him for
life, they left him groaning on the ground and continued their journey
without him.

Poor Ferko ate up the scrap of bread they had left him and wept
bitterly, but no one heard him or came to his help. Night came on, and
the poor blind youth had no eyes to close, and could only crawl along
the ground, not knowing in the least where he was going. But when the
sun was once more high in the heavens, Ferko felt the blazing heat
scorch him, and sought for some cool shady place to rest his aching
limbs. He climbed to the top of a hill and lay down in the grass, and as
he thought under the shadow of a big tree. But it was no tree he leant
against, but a gallows on which two ravens were seated. The one was
saying to the other as the weary youth lay down, ‘Is there anything the
least wonderful or remarkable about this neighbourhood?’

‘I should just think there was,’ replied the other; ‘many things that
don’t exist anywhere else in the world. There is a lake down there below
us, and anyone who bathes in it, though he were at death’s door, becomes
sound and well on the spot, and those who wash their eyes with the dew
on this hill become as sharp-sighted as the eagle, even if they have
been blind from their youth.’

‘Well,’ answered the first raven, ‘my eyes are in no want of this
healing bath, for, Heaven be praised, they are as good as ever they
were; but my wing has been very feeble and weak ever since it was shot
by an arrow many years ago, so let us fly at once to the lake that I may
be restored to health and strength again.’ And so they flew away.

Their words rejoiced Ferko’s heart, and he waited impatiently till
evening should come and he could rub the precious dew on his sightless
eyes.

At last it began to grow dusk, and the sun sank behind the mountains;
gradually it became cooler on the hill, and the grass grew wet with dew.
Then Ferko buried his face in the ground till his eyes were damp with
dewdrops, and in a moment he saw clearer than he had ever done in his
life before. The moon was shining brightly, and lighted him to the lake
where he could bathe his poor broken legs.

Then Ferko crawled to the edge of the lake and dipped his limbs in the
water. No sooner had he done so than his legs felt as sound and strong
as they had been before, and Ferko thanked the kind fate that had led
him to the hill where he had overheard the ravens’ conversation. He
filled a bottle with the healing water, and then continued his journey
in the best of spirits.

He had not gone far before he met a wolf, who was limping disconsolately
along on three legs, and who on perceiving Ferko began to howl dismally.

‘My good friend,’ said the youth, ‘be of good cheer, for I can soon heal
your leg,’ and with these words he poured some of the precious water
over the wolf’s paw, and in a minute the animal was springing about
sound and well on all fours. The grateful creature thanked his
benefactor warmly, and promised Ferko to do him a good turn if he should
ever need it.

Ferko continued his way till he came to a ploughed field. Here he
noticed a little mouse creeping wearily along on its hind paws, for its
front paws had both been broken in a trap.

Ferko felt so sorry for the little beast that he spoke to it in the most
friendly manner, and washed its small paws with the healing water. In
a moment the mouse was sound and whole, and after thanking the kind
physician it scampered away over the ploughed furrows.

Ferko again proceeded on his journey, but he hadn’t gone far before a
queen bee flew against him, trailing one wing behind her, which had been
cruelly torn in two by a big bird. Ferko was no less willing to help
her than he had been to help the wolf and the mouse, so he poured some
healing drops over the wounded wing. On the spot the queen bee was
cured, and turning to Ferko she said, ‘I am most grateful for your
kindness, and shall reward you some day.’ And with these words she flew
away humming, gaily.

Then Ferko wandered on for many a long day, and at length reached
a strange kingdom. Here, he thought to himself, he might as well
go straight to the palace and offer his services to the King of the
country, for he had heard that the King’s daughter was as beautiful as
the day.

So he went to the royal palace, and as he entered the door the first
people he saw were his two brothers who had so shamefully ill-treated
him. They had managed to obtain places in the King’s service, and when
they recognised Ferko with his eyes and legs sound and well they were
frightened to death, for they feared he would tell the King of their
conduct, and that they would be hung.

No sooner had Ferko entered the palace than all eyes were turned on the
handsome youth, and the King’s daughter herself was lost in admiration,
for she had never seen anyone so handsome in her life before. His
brothers noticed this, and envy and jealousy were added to their fear,
so much so that they determined once more to destroy him. They went to
the King and told him that Ferko was a wicked magician, who had come to
the palace with the intention of carrying off the Princess.

Then the King had Ferko brought before him, and said, ‘You are accused
of being a magician who wishes to rob me of my daughter, and I condemn
you to death; but if you can fulfil three tasks which I shall set you to
do your life shall be spared, on condition you leave the country; but if
you cannot perform what I demand you shall be hung on the nearest tree.’

And turning to the two wicked brothers he said, ‘Suggest something for
him to do; no matter how difficult, he must succeed in it or die.’

They did not think long, but replied, ‘Let him build your Majesty in one
day a more beautiful palace than this, and if he fails in the attempt
let him be hung.’

The King was pleased with this proposal, and commanded Ferko to set to
work on the following day. The two brothers were delighted, for they
thought they had now got rid of Ferko for ever. The poor youth himself
was heart-broken, and cursed the hour he had crossed the boundary of
the King’s domain. As he was wandering disconsolately about the meadows
round the palace, wondering how he could escape being put to death, a
little bee flew past, and settling on his shoulder whispered in his ear,
‘What is troubling you, my kind benefactor? Can I be of any help to you?
I am the bee whose wing you healed, and would like to show my gratitude
in some way.’

Ferko recognised the queen bee, and said, ‘Alas! how could you help me?
for I have been set to do a task which no one in the whole world could
do, let him be ever such a genius! To-morrow I must build a palace more
beautiful than the King’s, and it must be finished before evening.’

‘Is that all?’ answered the bee, ‘then you may comfort yourself; for
before the sun goes down to-morrow night a palace shall be built unlike
any that King has dwelt in before. Just stay here till I come again and
tell you that it is finished.’ Having said this she flew merrily away,
and Ferko, reassured by her words, lay down on the grass and slept
peacefully till the next morning.

Early on the following day the whole town was on its feet, and everyone
wondered how and where the stranger would build the wonderful palace.
The Princess alone was silent and sorrowful, and had cried all night
till her pillow was wet, so much did she take the fate of the beautiful
youth to heart.

Ferko spent the whole day in the meadows waiting the return of the bee.
And when evening was come the queen bee flew by, and perching on his
shoulder she said, ‘The wonderful palace is ready. Be of good cheer,
and lead the King to the hill just outside the city walls.’ And humming
gaily she flew away again.

Ferko went at once to the King and told him the palace was finished. The
whole court went out to see the wonder, and their astonishment was great
at the sight which met their eyes. A splendid palace reared itself on
the hill just outside the walls of the city, made of the most exquisite
flowers that ever grew in mortal garden. The roof was all of crimson
roses, the windows of lilies, the walls of white carnations, the floors
of glowing auriculas and violets, the doors of gorgeous tulips and
narcissi with sunflowers for knockers, and all round hyacinths and other
sweet-smelling flowers bloomed in masses, so that the air was perfumed
far and near and enchanted all who were present.

This splendid palace had been built by the grateful queen bee, who had
summoned all the other bees in the kingdom to help her.

The King’s amazement knew no bounds, and the Princess’s eyes beamed with
delight as she turned them from the wonderful building on the delighted
Ferko. But the two brothers had grown quite green with envy, and only
declared the more that Ferko was nothing but a wicked magician.

The King, although he had been surprised and astonished at the way his
commands had been carried out, was very vexed that the stranger should
escape with his life, and turning to the two brothers he said, ‘He has
certainly accomplished the first task, with the aid no doubt of his
diabolical magic; but what shall we give him to do now? Let us make it
as difficult as possible, and if he fails he shall die.’

Then the eldest brother replied, ‘The corn has all been cut, but it has
not yet been put into barns; let the knave collect all the grain in the
kingdom into one big heap before to-morrow night, and if as much as a
stalk of corn is left let him be put to death.

The Princess grew white with terror when she heard these words; but
Ferko felt much more cheerful than he had done the first time, and
wandered out into the meadows again, wondering how he was to get out of
the difficulty. But he could think of no way of escape. The sun sank to
rest and night came on, when a little mouse started out of the grass
at Ferko’s feet, and said to him, ‘I’m delighted to see you, my kind
benefactor; but why are you looking so sad? Can I be of any help to you,
and thus repay your great kindness to me?’

Then Ferko recognised the mouse whose front paws he had healed, and
replied, ‘Alas I how can you help me in a matter that is beyond any
human power! Before to-morrow night all the grain in the kingdom has
to be gathered into one big heap, and if as much as a stalk of corn is
wanting I must pay for it with my life.’

‘Is that all?’ answered the mouse; ‘that needn’t distress you much. Just
trust in me, and before the sun sets again you shall hear that your task
is done.’ And with these words the little creature scampered away into
the fields.

Ferko, who never doubted that the mouse would be as good as its word,
lay down comforted on the soft grass and slept soundly till next
morning. The day passed slowly, and with the evening came the little
mouse and said, ‘Now there is not a single stalk of corn left in any
field; they are all collected in one big heap on the hill out there.’

Then Ferko went joyfully to the King and told him that all he demanded
had been done. And the whole Court went out to see the wonder, and were
no less astonished than they had been the first time. For in a heap
higher than the King’s palace lay all the grain of the country, and not
a single stalk of corn had been left behind in any of the fields. And
how had all this been done? The little mouse had summoned every other
mouse in the land to its help, and together they had collected all the
grain in the kingdom.

The King could not hide his amazement, but at the same time his wrath
increased, and he was more ready than ever to believe the two brothers,
who kept on repeating that Ferko was nothing more nor less than a wicked
magician. Only the beautiful Princess rejoiced over Ferko’s success, and
looked on him with friendly glances, which the youth returned.

The more the cruel King gazed on the wonder before him, the more
angry he became, for he could not, in the face of his promise, put the
stranger to death. He turned once more to the two brothers and said,
‘His diabolical magic has helped him again, but now what third task
shall we set him to do? No matter how impossible it is, he must do it or
die.’

The eldest answered quickly, ‘Let him drive all the wolves of the
kingdom on to this hill before to-morrow night. If he does this he may
go free; if not he shall be hung as you have said.’

At these words the Princess burst into tears, and when the King saw this
he ordered her to be shut up in a high tower and carefully guarded till
the dangerous magician should either have left the kingdom or been hung
on the nearest tree.

Ferko wandered out into the fields again, and sat down on the stump of
a tree wondering what he should do next. Suddenly a big wolf ran up to
him, and standing still said, ‘I’m very glad to see you again, my kind
benefactor. What are you thinking about all alone by yourself? If I can
help you in any way only say the word, for I would like to give you a
proof of my gratitude.’

Ferko at once recognised the wolf whose broken leg he had healed, and
told him what he had to do the following day if he wished to escape with
his life. ‘But how in the world,’ he added, ‘am I to collect all the
wolves of the kingdom on to that hill over there?’

‘If that’s all you want done,’ answered the wolf, ‘you needn’t worry
yourself. I’ll undertake the task, and you’ll hear from me again before
sunset to-morrow. Keep your spirits up.’ And with these words he trotted
quickly away.

Then the youth rejoiced greatly, for now he felt that his life was safe;
but he grew very sad when he thought of the beautiful Princess, and that
he would never see her again if he left the country. He lay down once
more on the grass and soon fell fast asleep.

All the next day he spent wandering about the fields, and toward
evening the wolf came running to him in a great hurry and said, ‘I have
collected together all the wolves in the kingdom, and they are waiting
for you in the wood. Go quickly to the King, and tell him to go to the
hill that he may see the wonder you have done with his own eyes. Then
return at once to me and get on my back, and I will help you to drive
all the wolves together.’

Then Ferko went straight to the palace and told the King that he was
ready to perform the third task if he would come to the hill and see it
done. Ferko himself returned to the fields, and mounting on the wolf’s
back he rode to the wood close by.

Quick as lightning the wolf flew round the wood, and in a minute many
hundred wolves rose up before him, increasing in number every moment,
till they could be counted by thousands. He drove them all before him on
to the hill, where the King and his whole Court and Ferko’s two brothers
were standing. Only the lovely Princess was not present, for she was
shut up in her tower weeping bitterly.

The wicked brothers stamped and foamed with rage when they saw the
failure of their wicked designs. But the King was overcome by a sudden
terror when he saw the enormous pack of wolves approaching nearer and
nearer, and calling out to Ferko he said, ‘Enough, enough, we don’t want
any more.’

But the wolf on whose back Ferko sat, said to its rider, ‘Go on! go
on!’ and at the same moment many more wolves ran up the hill, howling
horribly and showing their white teeth.

The King in his terror called out, ‘Stop a moment; I will give you half
my kingdom if you will drive all the wolves away.’ But Ferko pretended
not to hear, and drove some more thousands before him, so that everyone
quaked with horror and fear.

Then the King raised his voice again and called out, ‘Stop! you shall
have my whole kingdom, if you will only drive these wolves back to the
places they came from.’

But the wolf kept on encouraging Ferko, and said, ‘Go on! go on!’ So he
led the wolves on, till at last they fell on the King and on the wicked
brothers, and ate them and the whole Court up in a moment.

Then Ferko went straight to the palace and set the Princess free, and on
the same day he married her and was crowned King of the country. And the
wolves all went peacefully back to their own homes, and Ferko and his
bride lived for many years in peace and happiness together, and were
much beloved by great and small in the land.




 THE GIANTS AND THE HERD-BOY(12)

(12) From the Bukowniaer. Von Wliolocki.

There was once upon a time a poor boy who had neither father nor mother.
In order to gain a living he looked after the sheep of a great Lord. Day
and night he spent out in the open fields, and only when it was very
wet and stormy did he take refuge in a little hut on the edge of a
big forest. Now one night, when he was sitting on the grass beside his
flocks, he heard not very far from him the sound as of some one crying.
He rose up and followed the direction of the noise. To his dismay and
astonishment he found a Giant lying at the entrance of the wood; he was
about to run off as fast as his legs could carry him, when the Giant
called out: ‘Don’t be afraid, I won’t harm you. On the contrary, I will
reward you handsomely if you will bind up my foot. I hurt it when I was
trying to root up an oak-tree.’ The Herd-boy took off his shirt, and
bound up the Giant’s wounded foot with it. Then the Giant rose up and
said, ‘Now come and I will reward you. We are going to celebrate a
marriage to-day, and I promise you we shall have plenty of fun. Come and
enjoy yourself, but in order that my brothers mayn’t see you, put this
band round your waist and then you’ll be invisible.’ With these words
he handed the Herd-boy a belt, and walking on in front he led him to
a fountain where hundreds of Giants and Giantesses were assembled
preparing to hold a wedding. They danced and played different games till
midnight; then one of the Giants tore up a plant by its roots, and all
the Giants and Giantesses made themselves so thin that they disappeared
into the earth through the hole made by the uprooting of the plant. The
wounded Giant remained behind to the last and called out, ‘Herd-boy,
where are you?’ ‘Here I am, close to you,’ was the reply. ‘Touch me,’
said the Giant, ‘so that you too may come with us under ground.’ The
Herd-boy did as he was told, and before he could have believed it
possible he found himself in a big hall, where even the walls were
made of pure gold. Then to his astonishment he saw that the hall was
furnished with the tables and chairs that belonged to his master. In a
few minutes the company began to eat and drink.

The banquet was a very gorgeous one, and the poor youth fell to and ate
and drank lustily. When he had eaten and drunk as much as he could he
thought to himself, ‘Why shouldn’t I put a loaf of bread in my pocket?
I shall be glad of it to-morrow.’ So he seized a loaf when no one was
looking and stowed it away under his tunic. No sooner had he done so
than the wounded Giant limped up to him and whispered softly, ‘Herd-boy,
where are you?’ ‘Here I am,’ replied the youth. ‘Then hold on to me,’
said the Giant, ‘so that I may lead you up above again.’ So the Herd-boy
held on to the Giant, and in a few moments he found himself on the earth
once more, but the Giant had vanished. The Herd-boy returned to his
sheep, and took off the invisible belt which he hid carefully in his
bag.

The next morning the lad felt hungry, and thought he would cut off a
piece of the loaf he had carried away from the Giants’ wedding feast,
and eat it. But although he tried with all his might, he couldn’t cut
off the smallest piece. Then in despair he bit the loaf, and what was
his astonishment when a piece of gold fell out of his mouth and rolled
at his feet. He bit the bread a second and third time, and each time a
piece of gold fell out of his mouth; but the bread remained untouched.
The Herd-boy was very much delighted over his stroke of good fortune,
and, hiding the magic loaf in his bag, he hurried off to the nearest
village to buy himself something to eat, and then returned to his sheep.

Now the Lord whose sheep the Herd-boy looked after had a very lovely
daughter, who always smiled and nodded to the youth when she walked with
her father in his fields. For a long time the Herd-boy had made up his
mind to prepare a surprise for this beautiful creature on her birthday.
So when the day approached he put on his invisible belt, took a sack of
gold pieces with him, and slipping into her room in the middle of the
night, he placed the bag of gold beside her bed and returned to his
sheep. The girl’s joy was great, and so was her parents’ next day when
they found the sack full of gold pieces. The Herd-boy was so pleased to
think what pleasure he had given that the next night he placed another
bag of gold beside the girl’s bed. And this he continued to do for seven
nights, and the girl and her parents made up their minds that it must
be a good Fairy who brought the gold every night. But one night they
determined to watch, and see from their hiding place who the bringer of
the sack of gold really was.

On the eighth night a fearful storm of wind and rain came on while the
Herd-boy was on his way to bring the beautiful girl another bag of gold.
Then for the first time he noticed, just as he reached his master’s
house, that he had forgotten the belt which made him invisible. He
didn’t like the idea of going back to his hut in the wind and wet, so
he just stepped as he was into the girl’s room, laid the sack of
gold beside her, and was turning to leave the room, when his master
confronted him and said, ‘You young rogue, so you were going to steal
the gold that a good Fairy brings every night, were you?’ The Herd-boy
was so taken aback by his words, that he stood trembling before him,
and did not dare to explain his presence. Then his master spoke. ‘As you
have hitherto always behaved well in my service I will not send you to
prison; but leave your place instantly and never let me see your face
again.’ So the Herd-boy went back to his hut, and taking his loaf and
belt with him, he went to the nearest town. There he bought himself
some fine clothes, and a beautiful coach with four horses, hired two
servants, and drove back to his master. You may imagine how astonished
he was to see his Herd-boy returning to him in this manner! Then the
youth told him of the piece of good luck that had befallen him, and
asked him for the hand of his beautiful daughter. This was readily
granted, and the two lived in peace and happiness to the end of their
lives.




 THE INVISIBLE PRINCE

Once upon a time there lived a Fairy who had power over the earth, the
sea, fire, and the air; and this Fairy had four sons. The eldest, who
was quick and lively, with a vivid imagination, she made Lord of Fire,
which was in her opinion the noblest of all the elements. To the second
son, whose wisdom and prudence made amends for his being rather dull,
she gave the government of the earth. The third was wild and savage, and
of monstrous stature; and the Fairy, his mother, who was ashamed of
his defects, hoped to hide them by creating him King of the Seas. The
youngest, who was the slave of his passions and of a very uncertain
temper, became Prince of the Air.

Being the youngest, he was naturally his mother’s favourite; but this
did not blind her to his weaknesses, and she foresaw that some day he
would suffer much pain through falling in love. So she thought the best
thing she could do was to bring him up with a horror of women; and, to
her great delight, she saw this dislike only increased as he grew older.
From his earliest childhood he heard nothing but stories of princes who
had fallen into all sorts of troubles through love; and she drew
such terrible pictures of poor little Cupid that the young man had no
difficulty in believing that he was the root of all evil.

All the time that this wise mother could spare from filling her son
with hatred for all womenkind she passed in giving him a love of the
pleasures of the chase, which henceforth became his chief joy. For his
amusement she had made a new forest, planted with the most splendid
trees, and turned loose in it every animal that could be found in any of
the four quarters of the globe. In the midst of this forest she built a
palace which had not its equal for beauty in the whole world, and then
she considered that she had done enough to make any prince happy.

Now it is all very well to abuse the God of Love, but a man cannot
struggle against his fate. In his secret heart the Prince got tired of
his mother’s constant talk on this subject; and when one day she quitted
the palace to attend to some business, begging him never to go beyond
the grounds, he at once jumped at the chance of disobeying her.

Left to himself the Prince soon forgot the wise counsels of his mother,
and feeling very much bored with his own company, he ordered some of
the spirits of the air to carry him to the court of a neighbouring
sovereign. This kingdom was situated in the Island of Roses, where the
climate is so delicious that the grass is always green and the flowers
always sweet. The waves, instead of beating on the rocks, seemed to die
gently on the shore; clusters of golden bushes covered the land, and the
vines were bent low with grapes.

The King of this island had a daughter named Rosalie, who was more
lovely than any girl in the whole world. No sooner had the eyes of the
Prince of the Air rested on her than he forgot all the terrible woes
which had been prophesied to him ever since he was born, for in one
single moment the plans of years are often upset. He instantly began to
think how best to make himself happy, and the shortest way that occurred
to him was to have Rosalie carried off by his attendant spirits.

It is easy to imagine the feelings of the King when he found that his
daughter had vanished. He wept her loss night and day, and his only
comfort was to talk over it with a young and unknown prince, who had
just arrived at the Court. Alas! he did not know what a deep interest
the stranger had in Rosalie, for he too had seen her, and had fallen a
victim to her charms.

One day the King, more sorrowful than usual, was walking sadly along
the sea-shore, when after a long silence the unknown Prince, who was his
only companion, suddenly spoke. ‘There is no evil without a remedy,’ he
said to the unhappy father; ‘and if you will promise me your daughter in
marriage, I will undertake to bring her back to you.’

‘You are trying to soothe me by vain promises,’ answered the King. ‘Did
I not see her caught up into the air, in spite of cries which would have
softened the heart of any one but the barbarian who has robbed me of
her? The unfortunate girl is pining away in some unknown land, where
perhaps no foot of man has ever trod, and I shall see her no more. But
go, generous stranger; bring back Rosalie if you can, and live happy
with her ever after in this country, of which I now declare you heir.’

Although the stranger’s name and rank were unknown to Rosalie’s father,
he was really the son of the King of the Golden Isle, which had for
capital a city that extended from one sea to another. The walls, washed
by the quiet waters, were covered with gold, which made one think of the
yellow sands. Above them was a rampart of orange and lemon trees, and
all the streets were paved with gold.

The King of this beautiful island had one son, for whom a life of
adventure had been foretold at his birth. This so frightened his father
and mother that in order to comfort them a Fairy, who happened to be
present at the time, produced a little pebble which she told them to
keep for the Prince till he grew up, as by putting it in his mouth he
would become invisible, as long as he did not try to speak, for if he
did the stone would lose all its virtue. In this way the good fairy
hoped that the Prince would be protected against all dangers.

No sooner did the Prince begin to grow out of boyhood than he longed to
see if the other countries of the world were as splendid as the one in
which he lived. So, under pretence of visiting some small islands that
belonged to his father, he set out. But a frightful storm drove his ship
on to unknown shores, where most of his followers were put to death by
the savages, and the Prince himself only managed to escape by making use
of his magic pebble. By this means he passed through the midst of them
unseen, and wandered on till he reached the coast, where he re-embarked
on board his ship.

The first land he sighted was the Island of Roses, and he went at once
to the court of the King, Rosalie’s father. The moment his eyes beheld
the Princess, he fell in love with her like everyone else.

He had already spent several months in this condition when the Prince of
the Air whirled her away, to the grief and despair of every man on the
island. But sad though everybody was, the Prince of the Golden Isle was
perfectly inconsolable, and he passed both days and nights in bemoaning
his loss.

‘Alas!’ he cried; ‘shall I never see my lovely Princess again?’ Who
knows where she may be, and what fairy may have her in his keeping? I am
only a man, but I am strong in my love, and I will seek the whole world
through till I find her.’

So saying, he left the court, and made ready for his journey.

He travelled many weary days without hearing a single word of the lost
Princess, till one morning, as he was walking through a thick forest,
he suddenly perceived a magnificent palace standing at the end of a
pine avenue, and his heart bounded to think that he might be gazing on
Rosalie’s prison. He hastened his steps, and quickly arrived at the gate
of the palace, which was formed of a single agate. The gate swung
open to let him through, and he next passed successively three courts,
surrounded by deep ditches filled with running water, with birds of
brilliant plumage flying about the banks. Everything around was rare and
beautiful, but the Prince scarcely raised his eyes to all these wonders.
He thought only of the Princess and where he should find her, but in
vain he opened every door and searched in every corner; he neither saw
Rosalie nor anyone else. At last there was no place left for him to
search but a little wood, which contained in the centre a sort of hall
built entirely of orange-trees, with four small rooms opening out of
the corners. Three of these were empty except for statues and wonderful
things, but in the fourth the Invisible Prince caught sight of Rosalie.
His joy at beholding her again was, however, somewhat lessened by seeing
that the Prince of the Air was kneeling at her feet, and pleading his
own cause. But it was in vain that he implored her to listen; she only
shook her head. ‘No,’ was all she would say; ‘you snatched me from
my father whom I loved, and all the splendour in the world can never
console me. Go! I can never feel anything towards you but hate and
contempt.’ With these words she turned away and entered her own
apartments.

Unknown to herself the Invisible Prince had followed her, but fearing to
be discovered by the Princess in the presence of others, he made up his
mind to wait quietly till dark; and employed the long hours in writing a
poem to the Princess, which he laid on the bed beside her. This done, he
thought of nothing but how best to deliver Rosalie, and he resolved to
take advantage of a visit which the Prince of the Air paid every year to
his mother and brothers in order to strike the blow.

One day Rosalie was sitting alone in her room thinking of her troubles
when she suddenly saw a pen get up from off the desk and begin to write
all by itself on a sheet of white paper. As she did not know that it was
guided by an invisible hand she was very much astonished, and the moment
that the pen had ceased to move she instantly went over to the table,
where she found some lovely verses, telling her that another shared her
distresses, whatever they might be, and loved her with all his heart;
and that he would never rest until he had delivered her from the hands
of the man she hated. Thus encouraged, she told him all her story, and
of the arrival of a young stranger in her father’s palace, whose looks
had so charmed her that since that day she had thought of no one else.
At these words the Prince could contain himself no longer. He took the
pebble from his mouth, and flung himself at Rosalie’s feet.

When they had got over the first rapture of meeting they began to make
plans to escape from the power of the Prince of the Air. But this did
not prove easy, for the magic stone would only serve for one person at
a time, and in order to save Rosalie the Prince of the Golden Isle would
have to expose himself to the fury of his enemy. But Rosalie would not
hear of this.

‘No, Prince,’ she said; ‘since you are here this island no longer feels
a prison. Besides, you are under the protection of a Fairy, who always
visits your father’s court at this season. Go instantly and seek her,
and when she is found implore the gift of another stone with similar
powers. Once you have that, there will be no further difficulty in the
way of escape.’

The Prince of the Air returned a few days later from his mother’s
palace, but the Invisible Prince had already set out. He had, however,
entirely forgotten the road by which he had come, and lost himself for
so long in the forest, that when at last he reached home the Fairy had
already left, and, in spite of all his grief, there was nothing for it
but to wait till the Fairy’s next visit, and allow Rosalie to suffer
three months longer. This thought drove him to despair, and he had
almost made up his mind to return to the place of her captivity, when
one day, as he was strolling along an alley in the woods, he saw a
huge oak open its trunk, and out of it step two Princes in earnest
conversation. As our hero had the magic stone in his mouth they imagined
themselves alone, and did not lower their voices.

‘What!’ said one, ‘are you always going to allow yourself to be
tormented by a passion which can never end happily, and in your whole
kingdom can you find nothing else to satisfy you?’

‘What is the use,’ replied the other, ‘of being Prince of the Gnomes,
and having a mother who is queen over all the four elements, if I cannot
win the love of the Princess Argentine? From the moment that I first saw
her, sitting in the forest surrounded by flowers, I have never ceased
to think of her night and day, and, although I love her, I am quite
convinced that she will never care for me. You know that I have in my
palace the cabinets of the years. In the first, great mirrors reflect
the past; in the second, we contemplate the present; in the third, the
future can be read. It was here that I fled after I had gazed on the
Princess Argentine, but instead of love I only saw scorn and contempt.
Think how great must be my devotion, when, in spite of my fate, I still
love on!’

Now the Prince of the Golden Isle was enchanted with this conversation,
for the Princess Argentine was his sister, and he hoped, by means of her
influence over the Prince of the Gnomes, to obtain from his brother
the release of Rosalie. So he joyfully returned to his father’s palace,
where he found his friend the Fairy, who at once presented him with
a magic pebble like his own. As may be imagined, he lost no time in
setting out to deliver Rosalie, and travelled so fast that he soon
arrived at the forest, in the midst of which she lay a captive. But
though he found the palace he did not find Rosalie. He hunted high and
low, but there was no sign of her, and his despair was so great that
he was ready, a thousand times over, to take his own life. At last he
remembered the conversation of the two Princes about the cabinets of the
years, and that if he could manage to reach the oak tree, he would be
certain to discover what had become of Rosalie. Happily, he soon found
out the secret of the passage and entered the cabinet of the present,
where he saw reflected in the mirrors the unfortunate Rosalie sitting
on the floor weeping bitterly, and surrounded with genii, who never left
her night or day.

This sight only increased the misery of the Prince, for he did not
know where the castle was, nor how to set about finding it. However,
he resolved to seek the whole world through till he came to the right
place. He began by setting sail in a favourable wind, but his bad luck
followed him even on the sea. He had scarcely lost sight of the land
when a violent storm arose, and after several hours of beating about,
the vessel was driven on to some rocks, on which it dashed itself
to bits. The Prince was fortunate enough to be able to lay hold of a
floating spar, and contrived to keep himself afloat; and, after a long
struggle with the winds and waves, he was cast upon a strange island.
But what was his surprise, on reaching the shore, to hear sounds of the
most heartrending distress, mingled with the sweetest songs which had
ever charmed him! His curiosity was instantly roused, and he advanced
cautiously till he saw two huge dragons guarding the gate of a wood.
They were terrible indeed to look upon. Their bodies were covered with
glittering scales; their curly tails extended far over the land; flames
darted from their mouths and noses, and their eyes would have made the
bravest shudder; but as the Prince was invisible and they did not see
him, he slipped past them into the wood. He found himself at once in a
labyrinth, and wandered about for a long time without meeting anyone; in
fact, the only sight he saw was a circle of human hands, sticking out
of the ground above the wrist, each with a bracelet of gold, on which
a name was written. The farther he advanced in the labyrinth the more
curious he became, till he was stopped by two corpses lying in the
midst of a cypress alley, each with a scarlet cord round his neck and a
bracelet on his arm on which were engraved their own names, and those of
two Princesses.

The invisible Prince recognised these dead men as Kings of two large
islands near his own home, but the names of the Princesses were unknown
to him. He grieved for their unhappy fate, and at once proceeded to bury
them; but no sooner had he laid them in their graves, than their hands
started up through the earth and remained sticking up like those of
their fellows.

The Prince went on his way, thinking about this strange adventure, when
suddenly at the turn of the walk he perceived a tall man whose face was
the picture of misery, holding in his hands a silken cord of the exact
colour of those round the necks of the dead men. A few steps further
this man came up with another as miserable to the full as he himself;
they silently embraced, and then without a word passed the cords round
their throats, and fell dead side by side. In vain the Prince rushed to
their assistance and strove to undo the cord. He could not loosen it; so
he buried them like the others and continued his path.

He felt, however, that great prudence was necessary, or he himself might
become the victim of some enchantment; and he was thankful to slip past
the dragons, and enter a beautiful park, with clear streams and sweet
flowers, and a crowd of men and maidens. But he could not forget
the terrible things he had seen, and hoped eagerly for a clue to the
mystery. Noticing two young people talking together, he drew near
thinking that he might get some explanation of what puzzled him. And so
he did.

‘You swear,’ said the Prince, ‘that you will love me till you die, but I
fear your faithless heart, and I feel that I shall soon have to seek the
Fairy Despair, ruler of half this island. She carries off the lovers
who have been cast away by their mistresses, and wish to have done with
life. She places them in a labyrinth where they are condemned to walk
for ever, with a bracelet on their arms and a cord round their necks,
unless they meet another as miserable as themselves. Then the cord is
pulled and they lie where they fall, till they are buried by the first
passer by. Terrible as this death would be,’ added the Prince, ‘it would
be sweeter than life if I had lost your love.’

The sight of all these happy lovers only made the Prince grieve the
more, and he wandered along the seashore spending his days; but one day
he was sitting on a rock bewailing his fate, and the impossibility
of leaving the island, when all in a moment the sea appeared to raise
itself nearly to the skies, and the caves echoed with hideous screams.
As he looked a woman rose from the depths of the sea, flying madly
before a furious giant. The cries she uttered softened the heart of
the Prince; he took the stone from his mouth, and drawing his sword
he rushed after the giant, so as to give the lady time to escape. But
hardly had he come within reach of the enemy, than the giant touched him
with a ring that he held in his hand, and the Prince remained immovable
where he stood. The giant then hastily rejoined his prey, and, seizing
her in his arms, he plunged her into the sea. Then he sent some tritons
to bind chains about the Prince of the Golden Isle, and he too felt
himself borne to the depths of the ocean, and without the hope of ever
again seeing the Princess.

Now the giant whom the invisible had so rashly attacked was the Lord
of the Sea, and the third son of the Queen of the Elements, and he had
touched the youth with a magic ring which enabled a mortal to live under
water. So the Prince of the Golden Isle found, when bound in chains by
the tritons, he was carried through the homes of strange monsters
and past immense seaweed forests, till he reached a vast sandy space,
surrounded by huge rocks. On the tallest of the rocks sat the giant as
on a throne.

‘Rash mortal,’ said he, when the Prince was dragged before him, ‘you
have deserved death, but you shall live only to suffer more cruelly. Go,
and add to the number of those whom it is my pleasure to torture.’

At these words the unhappy Prince found himself tied to a rock; but he
was not alone in his misfortunes, for all round him were chained Princes
and Princesses, whom the giant had led captive. Indeed, it was his chief
delight to create a storm, in order to add to the list of his prisoners.

As his hands were fastened, it was impossible for the Prince of the
Golden Isle to make use of his magic stone, and he passed his nights and
days dreaming of Rosalie. But at last the time came when the giant took
it into his head to amuse himself by arranging fights between some
of his captives. Lots were drawn, and one fell upon our Prince, whose
chains were immediately loosened. The moment he was set free, he
snatched up his stone, and became invisible.

The astonishment of the giant at the sudden disappearance of the Prince
may well be imagined. He ordered all the passages to be watched, but it
was too late, for the Prince had already glided between two rocks. He
wandered for a long while through the forests, where he met nothing but
fearful monsters; he climbed rock after rock, steered his way from tree
to tree, till at length he arrived at the edge of the sea, at the foot
of a mountain that he remembered to have seen in the cabinet of the
present, where Rosalie was held captive.

Filled with joy, he made his way to the top of the mountain which
pierced the clouds, and there he found a palace. He entered, and in the
middle of a long gallery he discovered a crystal room, in the midst of
which sat Rosalie, guarded night and day by genii. There was no door
anywhere, nor any window. At this sight the Prince became more puzzled
than ever, for he did not know how he was to warn Rosalie of his return.
Yet it broke his heart to see her weeping from dawn till dark.

One day, as Rosalie was walking up and down her room, she was surprised
to see that the crystal which served for a wall had grown cloudy, as if
some one had breathed on it, and, what was more, wherever she moved
the brightness of the crystal always became clouded. This was enough to
cause the Princess to suspect that her lover had returned. In order
to set the Prince of the Air’s mind at rest she began by being very
gracious to him, so that when she begged that her captivity might be a
little lightened she should not be refused. At first the only favour she
asked was to be allowed to walk for one hour every day up and down the
long gallery. This was granted, and the Invisible Prince speedily took
the opportunity of handing her the stone, which she at once slipped
into her mouth. No words can paint the fury of her captor at her
disappearance. He ordered the spirits of the air to fly through all
space, and to bring back Rosalie wherever she might be. They instantly
flew off to obey his commands, and spread themselves over the whole
earth.

Meantime Rosalie and the Invisible Prince had reached, hand in hand,
a door of the gallery which led through a terrace into the gardens. In
silence they glided along, and thought themselves already safe, when
a furious monster dashed itself by accident against Rosalie and the
Invisible Prince, and in her fright she let go his hand. No one can
speak as long as he is invisible, and besides, they knew that the
spirits were all around them, and at the slightest sound they would
be recognised; so all they could do was to feel about in the hope that
their hands might once more meet.

But, alas! the joy of liberty lasted but a short time. The Princess,
having wandered in vain up and down the forest, stopped at last on the
edge of a fountain. As she walked she wrote on the trees: ‘If ever the
Prince, my lover, comes this way, let him know that it is here I dwell,
and that I sit daily on the edge of this fountain, mingling my tears
with its waters.’

These words were read by one of the genii, who repeated them to his
master. The Prince of the Air, in his turn making himself invisible, was
led to the fountain, and waited for Rosalie. When she drew near he
held out his hand, which she grasped eagerly, taking it for that of her
lover; and, seizing his opportunity, the Prince passed a cord round her
arms, and throwing off his invisibility cried to his spirits to drag her
into the lowest pit.

It was at this moment that the Invisible Prince appeared, and at the
sight of the Prince of the Genii mounting into the air, holding a silken
cord, he guessed instantly that he was carrying off Rosalie.

He felt so overwhelmed by despair that he thought for an instant of
putting an end to his life. ‘Can I survive my misfortunes?’ he cried. ‘I
fancied I had come to an end of my troubles, and now they are worse than
ever. What will become of me? Never can I discover the place where this
monster will hide Rosalie.’

The unhappy youth had determined to let himself die, and indeed his
sorrow alone was enough to kill him, when the thought that by means
of the cabinets of the years he might find out where the Princess was
imprisoned, gave him a little ray of comfort. So he continued to walk
on through the forest, and after some hours he arrived at the gate of a
temple, guarded by two huge lions. Being invisible, he was able to enter
unharmed. In the middle of the temple was an altar, on which lay a book,
and behind the altar hung a great curtain. The Prince approached the
altar and opened the book, which contained the names of all the lovers
in the world: and in it he read that Rosalie had been carried off by the
Prince of the Air to an abyss which had no entrance except the one that
lay by way of the Fountain of Gold.

Now, as the Prince had not the smallest idea where this fountain was to
be found, it might be thought that he was not much nearer Rosalie than
before. This was not, however, the view taken by the Prince.

‘Though every step that I take may perhaps lead me further from her,’
he said to himself, ‘I am still thankful to know that she is alive
somewhere.’

On leaving the temple the Invisible Prince saw six paths lying before
him, each of which led through the wood. He was hesitating which to
choose, when he suddenly beheld two people coming towards him, down
the track which lay most to his right. They turned out to be the Prince
Gnome and his friend, and the sudden desire to get some news of his
sister, Princess Argentine, caused the Invisible Prince to follow them
and to listen to their conversation.

‘Do you think,’ the Prince Gnome was saying, ‘do you think that I would
not break my chains if I could? I know that the Princess Argentine will
never love me, yet each day I feel her dearer still. And as if this
were not enough, I have the horror of feeling that she probably loves
another. So I have resolved to put myself out of my pain by means of the
Golden Fountain. A single drop of its water falling on the sand around
will trace the name of my rival in her heart. I dread the test, and yet
this very dread convinces me of my misfortune.’

It may be imagined that after listening to these words the Invisible
Prince followed Prince Gnome like his shadow, and after walking some
time they arrived at the Golden Fountain. The unhappy lover stooped down
with a sigh, and dipping his finger in the water let fall a drop on
the sand. It instantly wrote the name of Prince Flame, his brother. The
shock of this discovery was so real, that Prince Gnome sank fainting
into the arms of his friend.

Meanwhile the Invisible Prince was turning over in his mind how he could
best deliver Rosalie. As, since he had been touched by the Giant’s ring,
he had the power to live in the water as well as on land, he at once
dived into the fountain. He perceived in one corner a door leading into
the mountain, and at the foot of the mountain was a high rock on which
was fixed an iron ring with a cord attached. The Prince promptly guessed
that the cord was used to chain the Princess, and drew his sword and cut
it. In a moment he felt the Princess’s hand in his, for she had
always kept her magic pebble in her mouth, in spite of the prayers and
entreaties of the Prince of the Air to make herself visible.

So hand in hand the invisible Prince and Rosalie crossed the mountain;
but as the Princess had no power of living under water, she could not
pass the Golden Fountain. Speechless and invisible they clung together
on the brink, trembling at the frightful tempest the Prince of the Air
had raised in his fury. The storm had already lasted many days when
tremendous heat began to make itself felt. The lightning flashed, the
thunder rattled, fire bolts fell from heaven, burning up the forests and
even the fields of corn. In one instant the very streams were dried up,
and the Prince, seizing his opportunity, carried the Princess over the
Golden Fountain.

It took them a long time still to reach the Golden Isle, but at last
they got there, and we may be quite sure they never wanted to leave it
any more.




 THE CROW(13)

(13) From the Polish. Kletke.

Once upon a time there were three Princesses who were all three young
and beautiful; but the youngest, although she was not fairer than the
other two, was the most loveable of them all.

About half a mile from the palace in which they lived there stood a
castle, which was uninhabited and almost a ruin, but the garden which
surrounded it was a mass of blooming flowers, and in this garden the
youngest Princess used often to walk.

One day when she was pacing to and fro under the lime trees, a black
crow hopped out of a rose-bush in front of her. The poor beast was all
torn and bleeding, and the kind little Princess was quite unhappy about
it. When the crow saw this it turned to her and said:

‘I am not really a black crow, but an enchanted Prince, who has been
doomed to spend his youth in misery. If you only liked, Princess, you
could save me. But you would have to say good-bye to all your own people
and come and be my constant companion in this ruined castle. There is
one habitable room in it, in which there is a golden bed; there you will
have to live all by yourself, and don’t forget that whatever you may see
or hear in the night you must not scream out, for if you give as much as
a single cry my sufferings will be doubled.’

The good-natured Princess at once left her home and her family and
hurried to the ruined castle, and took possession of the room with the
golden bed.

When night approached she lay down, but though she shut her eyes tight
sleep would not come. At midnight she heard to her great horror some one
coming along the passage, and in a minute her door was flung wide open
and a troop of strange beings entered the room. They at once proceeded
to light a fire in the huge fireplace; then they placed a great cauldron
of boiling water on it. When they had done this, they approached the
bed on which the trembling girl lay, and, screaming and yelling all
the time, they dragged her towards the cauldron. She nearly died with
fright, but she never uttered a sound. Then of a sudden the cock crew,
and all the evil spirits vanished.

At the same moment the crow appeared and hopped all round the room with
joy. It thanked the Princess most heartily for her goodness, and said
that its sufferings had already been greatly lessened.

Now one of the Princess’s elder sisters, who was very inquisitive, had
found out about everything, and went to pay her youngest sister a visit
in the ruined castle. She implored her so urgently to let her spend the
night with her in the golden bed, that at last the good-natured little
Princess consented. But at midnight, when the odd folk appeared, the
elder sister screamed with terror, and from this time on the youngest
Princess insisted always on keeping watch alone.

So she lived in solitude all the daytime, and at night she would have
been frightened, had she not been so brave; but every day the crow came
and thanked her for her endurance, and assured her that his sufferings
were far less than they had been.

And so two years passed away, when one day the crow came to the Princess
and said: ‘In another year I shall be freed from the spell I am under
at present, because then the seven years will be over. But before I
can resume my natural form, and take possession of the belongings of
my forefathers, you must go out into the world and take service as a
maidservant.’

The young Princess consented at once, and for a whole year she served as
a maid; but in spite of her youth and beauty she was very badly treated,
and suffered many things. One evening, when she was spinning flax, and
had worked her little white hands weary, she heard a rustling beside her
and a cry of joy. Then she saw a handsome youth standing beside her; who
knelt down at her feet and kissed the little weary white hands.

‘I am the Prince,’ he said, ‘who you in your goodness, when I was
wandering about in the shape of a black crow, freed from the most awful
torments. Come now to my castle with me, and let us live there happily
together.’

So they went to the castle where they had both endured so much. But when
they reached it, it was difficult to believe that it was the same, for
it had all been rebuilt and done up again. And there they lived for a
hundred years, a hundred years of joy and happiness.




HOW SIX MEN TRAVELLED THROUGH THE WIDE WORLD

There was once upon a time a man who understood all sorts of arts; he
served in the war, and bore himself bravely and well; but when the war
was over, he got his discharge, and set out on his travels with three
farthings of his pay in his pocket. ‘Wait,’ he said; ‘that does not
please me; only let me find the right people, and the King shall yet
give me all the treasures of his kingdom.’ He strode angrily into the
forest, and there he saw a man standing who had uprooted six trees as
if they were straws. He said to him, ‘Will you be my servant and travel
with me?’

‘Yes,’ he answered; ‘but first of all I will take this little bundle
of sticks home to my mother,’ and he took one of the trees and wound
it round the other five, raised the bundle on his shoulders and bore it
off. Then he came back and went with his master, who said, ‘We two ought
to be able to travel through the wide world!’ And when they had gone a
little way they came upon a hunter, who was on his knees, his gun on his
shoulder, aiming at something. The master said to him, ‘Hunter, what are
you aiming at?’

He answered, ‘Two miles from this place sits a fly on a branch of an
oak; I want to shoot out its left eye.’

‘Oh, go with me,’ said the man; ‘if we three are together we shall
easily travel through the wide world.’

The hunter agreed and went with him, and they came to seven windmills
whose sails were going round quite fast, and yet there was not a breath
of wind, nor was a leaf moving. The man said, ‘I don’t know what is
turning those windmills; there is not the slightest breeze blowing.’ So
he walked on with his servants, and when they had gone two miles they
saw a man sitting on a tree, holding one of his nostrils and blowing out
of the other.

‘Fellow, what are you puffing at up there?’ asked the man.

He replied, ‘Two miles from this place are standing seven windmills;
see, I am blowing to drive them round.’

‘Oh, go with me,’ said the man; ‘if we four are together we shall easily
travel through the wide world.’

So the blower got down and went with him, and after a time they saw a
man who was standing on one leg, and had unstrapped the other and
laid it near him. Then said the master, ‘You have made yourself very
comfortable to rest!’

‘I am a runner,’ answered he; ‘and so that I shall not go too quickly,
I have unstrapped one leg; when I run with two legs, I go faster than a
bird flies.’

‘Oh, go with me; if we five are together, we shall easily travel through
the wide world.’ So he went with him, and, not long afterwards, they met
a man who wore a little hat, but he had it slouched over one ear.

‘Manners, manners!’ said the master to him; ‘don’t hang your hat over
one ear; you look like a madman!’

‘I dare not,’ said the other, ‘for if I were to put my hat on straight,
there would come such a frost that the very birds in the sky would
freeze and fall dead on the earth.’

‘Oh, go with me,’ said the master; ‘if we six are together, we shall
easily travel through the wide world.

Now the Six came to a town in which the King had proclaimed that whoever
should run with his daughter in a race, and win, should become her
husband; but if he lost, he must lose his head. This was reported to
the man who declared he would compete, ‘but,’ he said, ‘I shall let my
servant run for me.’

The King replied, ‘Then both your heads must be staked, and your head
and his must be guaranteed for the winner.’

When this was agreed upon and settled, the man strapped on the runner’s
other leg, saying to him, ‘Now be nimble, and see that we win!’ It was
arranged that whoever should first bring water out of a stream a long
way off, should be the victor. Then the runner got a pitcher, and the
King’s daughter another, and they began to run at the same time; but in
a moment, when the King’s daughter was only just a little way off,
no spectator could see the runner, and it seemed as if the wind had
whistled past. In a short time he reached the stream, filled his
pitcher with water, and turned round again. But, half way home, a great
drowsiness came over him; he put down his pitcher, lay down, and fell
asleep. He had, however, put a horse’s skull which was lying on the
ground, for his pillow, so that he should not be too comfortable and
might soon wake up.

In the meantime the King’s daughter, who could also run well, as well
as an ordinary man could, reached the stream, and hastened back with her
pitcher full of water. When she saw the runner lying there asleep, she
was delighted, and said, ‘My enemy is given into my hands!’ She emptied
his pitcher and ran on.

Everything now would have been lost, if by good luck the hunter had not
been standing on the castle tower and had seen everything with his sharp
eyes.

‘Ah,’ said he, ‘the King’s daughter shall not overreach us;’ and,
loading his gun, he shot so cleverly, that he shot away the horse’s
skull from under the runner’s head, without its hurting him. Then the
runner awoke, jumped up, and saw that his pitcher was empty and the
King’s daughter far ahead. But he did not lose courage, and ran back
to the stream with his pitcher, filled it once more with water, and was
home ten minutes before the King’s daughter arrived.

‘Look,’ said he, ‘I have only just exercised my legs; that was nothing
of a run.’

But the King was angry, and his daughter even more so, that she should
be carried away by a common, discharged soldier. They consulted together
how they could destroy both him and his companions.

‘Then,’ said the King to her, ‘I have found a way. Don’t be frightened;
they shall not come home again.’ He said to them, ‘You must now make
merry together, and eat and drink,’ and he led them into a room which
had a floor of iron; the doors were also of iron, and the windows were
barred with iron. In the room was a table spread with delicious food.
The King said to them, ‘Go in and enjoy yourselves,’ and as soon as
they were inside he had the doors shut and bolted. Then he made the cook
come, and ordered him to keep up a large fire under the room until the
iron was red-hot. The cook did so, and the Six sitting round the table
felt it grow very warm, and they thought this was because of their good
fare; but when the heat became still greater and they wanted to go out,
but found the doors and windows fastened, then they knew that the King
meant them harm and was trying to suffocate them.

‘But he shall not succeed,’ cried he of the little hat, ‘I will make a
frost come which shall make the fire ashamed and die out!’ So he put his
hat on straight, and at once there came such a frost that all the heat
disappeared and the food on the dishes began to freeze. When a couple of
hours had passed, and the King thought they must be quite dead from the
heat, he had the doors opened and went in himself to see.

But when the doors were opened, there stood all Six, alive and well,
saying they were glad they could come out to warm themselves, for the
great cold in the room had frozen all the food hard in the dishes. Then
the King went angrily to the cook, and scolded him, and asked him why he
had not done what he was told.

But the cook answered, ‘There is heat enough there; see for yourself.’
Then the King saw a huge fire burning under the iron room, and
understood that he could do no harm to the Six in this way. The King
now began again to think how he could free himself from his unwelcome
guests. He commanded the master to come before him, and said, ‘If you
will take gold, and give up your right to my daughter, you shall have as
much as you like.’

‘Oh, yes, your Majesty,’ answered he, ‘give me as much as my servant can
carry, and I will give up your daughter.’

The King was delighted, and the man said, ‘I will come and fetch it in
fourteen days.’

Then he called all the tailors in the kingdom together, and made them
sit down for fourteen days sewing at a sack. When it was finished, he
made the strong man who had uprooted the trees take the sack on his
shoulder and go with him to the King. Then the King said, ‘What a
powerful fellow that is, carrying that bale of linen as large as a house
on his shoulder!’ and he was much frightened, and thought ‘What a lot of
gold he will make away with!’ Then he had a ton of gold brought, which
sixteen of the strongest men had to carry; but the strong man seized it
with one hand, put it in the sack, saying, ‘Why don’t you bring me more?
That scarcely covers the bottom!’ Then the King had to send again and
again to fetch his treasures, which the strong man shoved into the sack,
and the sack was only half full.

‘Bring more,’ he cried, ‘these crumbs don’t fill it.’ So seven thousand
waggons of the gold of the whole kingdom were driven up; these the
strong man shoved into the sack, oxen and all.

‘I will no longer be particular,’ he said, ‘and will take what comes, so
that the sack shall be full.’

When everything was put in and there was not yet enough, he said, ‘I
will make an end of this; it is easy to fasten a sack when it is not
full.’ Then he threw it on his back and went with his companions.

Now, when the King saw how a single man was carrying away the wealth
of the whole country he was very angry, and made his cavalry mount
and pursue the Six, and bring back the strong man with the sack. Two
regiments soon overtook them, and called to them, ‘You are prisoners!
lay down the sack of gold or you shall be cut down.’

‘What do you say?’ said the blower, ‘we are prisoners? Before that, you
shall dance in the air!’ And he held one nostril and blew with the other
at the two regiments; they were separated and blown away in the blue sky
over the mountains, one this way, and the other that. A sergeant-major
cried for mercy, saying he had nine wounds, and was a brave fellow, and
did not deserve this disgrace. So the blower let him off, and he came
down without hurt. Then he said to him, ‘Now go home to the King, and
say that if he sends any more cavalry I will blow them all into the
air.’

When the King received the message, he said, ‘Let the fellows go; they
are bewitched.’ Then the Six brought the treasure home, shared it among
themselves, and lived contentedly till the end of their days.




 THE WIZARD KING(14)

(14) From Les fees illustres.

In very ancient times there lived a King, whose power lay not only in
the vast extent of his dominions, but also in the magic secrets of which
he was master. After spending the greater part of his early youth in
pleasure, he met a Princess of such remarkable beauty that he at once
asked her hand in marriage, and, having obtained it, considered himself
the happiest of men.

After a year’s time a son was born, worthy in every way of such
distinguished parents, and much admired by the whole Court. As soon as
the Queen thought him strong enough for a journey she set out with him
secretly to visit her Fairy godmother. I said secretly, because the
Fairy had warned the Queen that the King was a magician; and as from
time immemorial there had been a standing feud between the Fairies and
the Wizards, he might not have approved of his wife’s visit.

The Fairy godmother, who took the deepest interest in all the Queen’s
concerns, and who was much pleased with the little Prince, endowed him
with the power of pleasing everybody from his cradle, as well as with
a wonderful ease in learning everything which could help to make him
a perfectly accomplished Prince. Accordingly, to the delight of his
teachers, he made the most rapid progress in his education, constantly
surpassing everyone’s expectations. Before he was many years old,
however, he had the great sorrow of losing his mother, whose last words
were to advise him never to undertake anything of importance without
consulting the Fairy under whose protection she had placed him.

The Prince’s grief at the death of his mother was great, but it
was nothing compared to that of the King, his father, who was quite
inconsolable for the loss of his dear wife. Neither time nor reason
seemed to lighten his sorrow, and the sight of all the familiar faces
and things about him only served to remind him of his loss. He therefore
resolved to travel for change, and by means of his magic art was able
to visit every country he came to see under different shapes, returning
every few weeks to the place where he had left a few followers.

Having travelled from land to land in this fashion without finding
anything to rivet his attention, it occurred to him to take the form of
an eagle, and in this shape he flew across many countries and arrived
at length in a new and lovely spot, where the air seemed filled with the
scent of jessamine and orange flowers with which the ground was thickly
planted. Attracted by the sweet perfume he flew lower, and perceived
some large and beautiful gardens filled with the rarest flowers, and
with fountains throwing up their clear waters into the air in a hundred
different shapes. A wide stream flowed through the garden, and on it
floated richly ornamented barges and gondolas filled with people dressed
in the most elegant manner and covered with jewels.

In one of these barges sat the Queen of that country with her only
daughter, a maiden more beautiful than the Day Star, and attended by
the ladies of the Court. No more exquisitely lovely mortal was ever seen
than this Princess, and it needed all an eagle’s strength of sight to
prevent the King being hopelessly dazzled. He perched on the top of a
large orange tree, whence he was able to survey the scene and to gaze at
pleasure on the Princess’s charms.

Now, an eagle with a King’s heart in his breast is apt to be bold,
and accordingly he instantly made up his mind to carry off the lovely
damsel, feeling sure that having once seen her he could not live without
her.

He waited till he saw her in the act of stepping ashore, when, suddenly
swooping down, he carried her off before her equerry in attendance had
advanced to offer her his hand. The Princess, on finding herself in an
eagle’s talons, uttered the most heart-breaking shrieks and cries; but
her captor, though touched by her distress, would not abandon his lovely
prey, and continued to fly through the air too fast to allow of his
saying anything to comfort her.

At length, when he thought they had reached a safe distance, he began
to lower his flight, and gradually descending to earth, deposited
his burden in a flowery meadow. He then entreated her pardon for his
violence, and told her that he was about to carry her to a great kingdom
over which he ruled, and where he desired she should rule with him,
adding many tender and consoling expressions.

For some time the Princess remained speechless; but recovering herself
a little, she burst into a flood of tears. The King, much moved, said,
‘Adorable Princess, dry your tears. I implore you. My only wish is to
make you the happiest person in the world.’

‘If you speak truth, my lord,’ replied the Princess, ‘restore to me the
liberty you have deprived me of. Otherwise I can only look on you as my
worst enemy.’

The King retorted that her opposition filled him with despair, but that
he hoped to carry her to a place where all around would respect her, and
where every pleasure would surround her. So saying, he seized her once
more, and in spite of all her cries he rapidly bore her off to the
neighbourhood of his capital. Here he gently placed her on a lawn, and
as he did so she saw a magnificent palace spring up at her feet. The
architecture was imposing, and in the interior the rooms were handsome
and furnished in the best possible taste.

The Princess, who expected to be quite alone, was pleased at finding
herself surrounded by a number of pretty girls, all anxious to wait on
her, whilst a brilliantly-coloured parrot said the most agreeable things
in the world.

On arriving at this palace the King had resumed his own form, and
though no longer young, he might well have pleased any other than this
Princess, who had been so prejudiced against him by his violence that
she could only regard him with feelings of hatred, which she was at
no pains to conceal. The King hoped, however, that time might not only
soften her anger, but accustom her to his sight. He took the precaution
of surrounding the palace with a dense cloud, and then hastened to his
Court, where his prolonged absence was causing much anxiety.

The Prince and all the courtiers were delighted to see their beloved
King again, but they had to submit themselves to more frequent absences
than ever on his part. He made business a pretext for shutting himself
up in his study, but it was really in order to spend the time with the
Princess, who remained inflexible.

Not being able to imagine what could be the cause of so much obstinacy
the King began to fear, lest, in spite of all his precautions, she might
have heard of the charms of the Prince his son, whose goodness, youth
and beauty, made him adored at Court. This idea made him horribly
uneasy, and he resolved to remove the cause of his fears by sending the
Prince on his travels escorted by a magnificent retinue.

The Prince, after visiting several Courts, arrived at the one where the
lost Princess was still deeply mourned. The King and Queen received him
most graciously, and some festivities were revived to do him honour.

One day when the Prince was visiting the Queen in her own apartments he
was much struck by a most beautiful portrait. He eagerly inquired whose
it was, and the Queen, with many tears, told him it was all that was
left her of her beloved daughter, who had suddenly been carried off, she
knew neither where nor how.

The Prince was deeply moved, and vowed that he would search the world
for the Princess, and take no rest till he had found and restored her to
her mother’s arms. The Queen assured him of her eternal gratitude,
and promised, should he succeed, to give him her daughter in marriage,
together with all the estates she herself owned.

The Prince, far more attracted by the thoughts of possessing the
Princess than her promised dower, set forth in his quest after taking
leave of the King and Queen, the latter giving him a miniature of her
daughter which she was in the habit of wearing. His first act was
to seek the Fairy under whose protection he had been placed, and he
implored her to give him all the assistance of her art and counsel in
this important matter.

After listening attentively to the whole adventure, the Fairy asked
for time to consult her books. After due consideration she informed the
Prince that the object of his search was not far distant, but that it
was too difficult for him to attempt to enter the enchanted palace where
she was, as the King his father had surrounded it with a thick cloud,
and that the only expedient she could think of would be to gain
possession of the Princess’s parrot. This, she added, did not
appear impossible, as it often flew about to some distance in the
neighbourhood.

Having told the Prince all this, the Fairy went out in hopes of seeing
the parrot, and soon returned with the bird in her hand. She promptly
shut it up in a cage, and, touching the Prince with her wand,
transformed him into an exactly similar parrot; after which, she
instructed him how to reach the Princess.

The Prince reached the palace in safety, but was so dazzled at first by
the Princess’s beauty, which far surpassed his expectations, that he
was quite dumb for a time. The Princess was surprised and anxious, and
fearing the parrot, who was her greatest comfort, had fallen ill, she
took him in her hand and caressed him. This soon reassured the Prince,
and encouraged him to play his part well, and he began to say a thousand
agreeable things which charmed the Princess.

Presently the King appeared, and the parrot noticed with joy how much
he was disliked. As soon as the King left, the Princess retired to her
dressing-room, the parrot flew after her and overheard her lamentations
at the continued persecutions of the King, who had pressed her to
consent to their marriage. The parrot said so many clever and tender
things to comfort her that she began to doubt whether this could indeed
be her own parrot.

When he saw her well-disposed towards him, he exclaimed: ‘Madam, I
have a most important secret to confide to you, and I beg you not to be
alarmed by what I am about to say. I am here on behalf of the Queen your
mother, with the object of delivering your Highness; to prove which,
behold this portrait which she gave me herself.’ So saying he drew forth
the miniature from under his wing. The Princess’s surprise was great,
but after what she had seen and heard it was impossible not to indulge
in hope, for she had recognised the likeness of herself which her mother
always wore.

The parrot, finding she was not much alarmed, told her who he was, all
that her mother had promised him and the help he had already received
from a Fairy who had assured him that she would give him means to
transport the Princess to her mother’s arms.

When he found her listening attentively to him, he implored the Princess
to allow him to resume his natural shape. She did not speak, so he drew
a feather from his wing, and she beheld before her a Prince of such
surpassing beauty that it was impossible not to hope that she might owe
her liberty to so charming a person.

Meantime the Fairy had prepared a chariot, to which she harnessed two
powerful eagles; then placing the cage, with the parrot in it,
she charged the bird to conduct it to the window of the Princess’s
dressing-room. This was done in a few minutes, and the Princess,
stepping into the chariot with the Prince, was delighted to find her
parrot again.

As they rose through the air the Princess remarked a figure mounted on
an eagle’s back flying in front of the chariot. She was rather alarmed,
but the Prince reassured her, telling her it was the good Fairy to
whom she owed so much, and who was now conducting her in safety to her
mother.

That same morning the King woke suddenly from a troubled sleep. He
had dreamt that the Princess was being carried off from him, and,
transforming himself into an eagle, he flew to the palace. When he
failed to find her he flew into a terrible rage, and hastened home to
consult his books, by which means he discovered that it was his son
who had deprived him of this precious treasure. Immediately he took the
shape of a harpy, and, filled with rage, was determined to devour his
son, and even the Princess too, if only he could overtake them.

He set out at full speed; but he started too late, and was further
delayed by a strong wind which the Fairy raised behind the young couple
so as to baffle any pursuit.

You may imagine the rapture with which the Queen received the daughter
she had given up for lost, as well as the amiable Prince who had rescued
her. The Fairy entered with them, and warned the Queen that the Wizard
King would shortly arrive, infuriated by his loss, and that nothing
could preserve the Prince and Princess from his rage and magic unless
they were actually married.

The Queen hastened to inform the King her husband, and the wedding took
place on the spot.

As the ceremony was completed the Wizard King arrived. His despair at
being so late bewildered him so entirely that he appeared in his natural
form and attempted to sprinkle some black liquid over the bride and
bridegroom, which was intended to kill them, but the Fairy stretched out
her wand and the liquid dropped on the Magician himself. He fell down
senseless, and the Princess’s father, deeply offended at the cruel
revenge which had been attempted, ordered him to be removed and locked
up in prison.

Now as magicians lose all their power as soon as they are in prison, the
King felt himself much embarrassed at being thus at the mercy of
those he had so greatly offended. The Prince implored and obtained his
father’s pardon, and the prison doors were opened.

No sooner was this done than the Wizard King was seen in the air under
the form of some unknown bird, exclaiming as he flew off that he would
never forgive either his son or the Fairy the cruel wrong they had done
him.

Everyone entreated the Fairy to settle in the kingdom where she now was,
to which she consented. She built herself a magnificent palace, to which
she transported her books and fairy secrets, and where she enjoyed the
sight of the perfect happiness she had helped to bestow on the entire
royal family.




 THE NIXY(15)

(15) From the German. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a miller who was very well off, and had as
much money and as many goods as he knew what to do with. But sorrow
comes in the night, and the miller all of a sudden became so poor
that at last he could hardly call the mill in which he sat his own. He
wandered about all day full of despair and misery, and when he lay down
at night he could get no rest, but lay awake all night sunk in sorrowful
thoughts.

One morning he rose up before dawn and went outside, for he thought his
heart would be lighter in the open air. As he wandered up and down on
the banks of the mill-pond he heard a rustling in the water, and when he
looked near he saw a white woman rising up from the waves.

He realised at once that this could be none other than the nixy of the
mill-pond, and in his terror he didn’t know if he should fly away or
remain where he was. While he hesitated the nixy spoke, called him by
his name, and asked him why he was so sad.

When the miller heard how friendly her tone was, he plucked up heart and
told her how rich and prosperous he had been all his life up till now,
when he didn’t know what he was to do for want and misery.

Then the nixy spoke comforting words to him, and promised that she would
make him richer and more prosperous than he had ever been in his life
before, if he would give her in return the youngest thing in his house.

The miller thought she must mean one of his puppies or kittens, so
promised the nixy at once what she asked, and returned to his mill full
of hope. On the threshold he was greeted by a servant with the news that
his wife had just given birth to a boy.

The poor miller was much horrified by these tidings, and went in to
his wife with a heavy heart to tell her and his relations of the fatal
bargain he had just struck with the nixy. ‘I would gladly give up all
the good fortune she promised me,’ he said, ‘if I could only save my
child.’ But no one could think of any advice to give him, beyond taking
care that the child never went near the mill-pond.

So the boy throve and grew big, and in the meantime all prospered with
the miller, and in a few years he was richer than he had ever been
before. But all the same he did not enjoy his good fortune, for he could
not forget his compact with the nixy, and he knew that sooner or later
she would demand his fulfilment of it. But year after year went by, and
the boy grew up and became a great hunter, and the lord of the land took
him into his service, for he was as smart and bold a hunter as you would
wish to see. In a short time he married a pretty young wife, and lived
with her in great peace and happiness.

One day when he was out hunting a hare sprang up at his feet, and ran
for some way in front of him in the open field. The hunter pursued it
hotly for some time, and at last shot it dead. Then he proceeded to
skin it, never noticing that he was close to the mill-pond, which from
childhood up he had been taught to avoid. He soon finished the skinning,
and went to the water to wash the blood off his hands. He had hardly
dipped them in the pond when the nixy rose up in the water, and seizing
him in her wet arms she dragged him down with her under the waves.

When the hunter did not come home in the evening his wife grew very
anxious, and when his game bag was found close to the mill-pond she
guessed at once what had befallen him. She was nearly beside herself
with grief, and roamed round and round the pond calling on her husband
without ceasing. At last, worn out with sorrow and fatigue, she fell
asleep and dreamt that she was wandering along a flowery meadow, when
she came to a hut where she found an old witch, who promised to restore
her husband to her.

When she awoke next morning she determined to set out and find the
witch; so she wandered on for many a day, and at last she reached the
flowery meadow and found the hut where the old witch lived. The poor
wife told her all that had happened and how she had been told in a dream
of the witch’s power to help her.

The witch counselled her to go to the pond the first time there was a
full moon, and to comb her black hair with a golden comb, and then to
place the comb on the bank. The hunter’s wife gave the witch a handsome
present, thanked her heartily, and returned home.

Time dragged heavily till the time of the full moon, but it passed at
last, and as soon as it rose the young wife went to the pond, combed
her black hair with a golden comb, and when she had finished, placed the
comb on the bank; then she watched the water impatiently. Soon she heard
a rushing sound, and a big wave rose suddenly and swept the comb off the
bank, and a minute after the head of her husband rose from the pond and
gazed sadly at her. But immediately another wave came, and the head sank
back into the water without having said a word. The pond lay still and
motionless, glittering in the moonshine, and the hunter’s wife was not a
bit better off than she had been before.

In despair she wandered about for days and nights, and at last, worn out
by fatigue, she sank once more into a deep sleep, and dreamt exactly the
same dream about the old witch. So next morning she went again to the
flowery meadow and sought the witch in her hut, and told her of her
grief. The old woman counselled her to go to the mill-pond the next
full moon and play upon a golden flute, and then to lay the flute on the
bank.

As soon as the next moon was full the hunter’s wife went to the
mill-pond, played on a golden flute, and when she had finished placed it
on the bank. Then a rushing sound was heard, and a wave swept the flute
off the bank, and soon the head of the hunter appeared and rose up
higher and higher till he was half out of the water. Then he gazed sadly
at his wife and stretched out his arms towards her. But another rushing
wave arose and dragged him under once more. The hunter’s wife, who had
stood on the bank full of joy and hope, sank into despair when she saw
her husband snatched away again before her eyes.

But for her comfort she dreamt the same dream a third time, and betook
herself once more to the old witch’s hut in the flowery meadow. This
time the old woman told her to go the next full moon to the mill-pond,
and to spin there with a golden spinning-wheel, and then to leave the
spinning-wheel on the bank.

The hunter’s wife did as she was advised, and the first night the moon
was full she sat and spun with a golden spinning-wheel, and then left
the wheel on the bank. In a few minutes a rushing sound was heard in the
waters, and a wave swept the spinning-wheel from the bank. Immediately
the head of the hunter rose up from the pond, getting higher and higher
each moment, till at length he stepped on to the bank and fell on his
wife’s neck.

But the waters of the pond rose up suddenly, overflowed the bank where
the couple stood, and dragged them under the flood. In her despair the
young wife called on the old witch to help her, and in a moment the
hunter was turned into a frog and his wife into a toad. But they were
not able to remain together, for the water tore them apart, and when the
flood was over they both resumed their own shapes again, but the hunter
and the hunter’s wife found themselves each in a strange country, and
neither knew what had become of the other.

The hunter determined to become a shepherd, and his wife too became a
shepherdess. So they herded their sheep for many years in solitude and
sadness.

Now it happened once that the shepherd came to the country where the
shepherdess lived. The neighbourhood pleased him, and he saw that the
pasture was rich and suitable for his flocks. So he brought his sheep
there, and herded them as before. The shepherd and shepherdess became
great friends, but they did not recognise each other in the least.

But one evening when the moon was full they sat together watching their
flocks, and the shepherd played upon his flute. Then the shepherdess
thought of that evening when she had sat at the full moon by the
mill-pond and had played on the golden flute; the recollection was too
much for her, and she burst into tears. The shepherd asked her why she
was crying, and left her no peace till she told him all her story. Then
the scales fell from the shepherd’s eyes, and he recognised his wife,
and she him. So they returned joyfully to their own home, and lived in
peace and happiness ever after.




THE GLASS MOUNTAIN(16)

(16) From the Polish. Kletke.

Once upon a time there was a Glass Mountain at the top of which stood
a castle made of pure gold, and in front of the castle there grew an
apple-tree on which there were golden apples.

Anyone who picked an apple gained admittance into the golden castle, and
there in a silver room sat an enchanted Princess of surpassing fairness
and beauty. She was as rich too as she was beautiful, for the cellars of
the castle were full of precious stones, and great chests of the finest
gold stood round the walls of all the rooms.

Many knights had come from afar to try their luck, but it was in vain
they attempted to climb the mountain. In spite of having their horses
shod with sharp nails, no one managed to get more than half-way up, and
then they all fell back right down to the bottom of the steep slippery
hill. Sometimes they broke an arm, sometimes a leg, and many a brave man
had broken his neck even.

The beautiful Princess sat at her window and watched the bold knights
trying to reach her on their splendid horses. The sight of her always
gave men fresh courage, and they flocked from the four quarters of the
globe to attempt the work of rescuing her. But all in vain, and for
seven years the Princess had sat now and waited for some one to scale
the Glass Mountain.

A heap of corpses both of riders and horses lay round the mountain, and
many dying men lay groaning there unable to go any farther with their
wounded limbs. The whole neighbourhood had the appearance of a vast
churchyard. In three more days the seven years would be at an end,
when a knight in golden armour and mounted on a spirited steed was seen
making his way towards the fatal hill.

Sticking his spurs into his horse he made a rush at the mountain, and
got up half-way, then he calmly turned his horse’s head and came down
again without a slip or stumble. The following day he started in the
same way; the horse trod on the glass as if it had been level earth,
and sparks of fire flew from its hoofs. All the other knights gazed in
astonishment, for he had almost gained the summit, and in another moment
he would have reached the apple-tree; but of a sudden a huge eagle rose
up and spread its mighty wings, hitting as it did so the knight’s horse
in the eye.

The beast shied, opened its wide nostrils and tossed its mane, then
rearing high up in the air, its hind feet slipped and it fell with its
rider down the steep mountain side. Nothing was left of either of them
except their bones, which rattled in the battered golden armour like dry
peas in a pod.

And now there was only one more day before the close of the seven years.
Then there arrived on the scene a mere schoolboy--a merry, happy-hearted
youth, but at the same time strong and well-grown. He saw how many
knights had broken their necks in vain, but undaunted he approached the
steep mountain on foot and began the ascent.

For long he had heard his parents speak of the beautiful Princess who
sat in the golden castle at the top of the Glass Mountain. He listened
to all he heard, and determined that he too would try his luck. But
first he went to the forest and caught a lynx, and cutting off the
creature’s sharp claws, he fastened them on to his own hands and feet.

Armed with these weapons he boldly started up the Glass Mountain.

The sun was nearly going down, and the youth had not got more than
half-way up. He could hardly draw breath he was so worn out, and his
mouth was parched by thirst. A huge black cloud passed over his head,
but in vain did he beg and beseech her to let a drop of water fall on
him. He opened his mouth, but the black cloud sailed past and not as
much as a drop of dew moistened his dry lips.

His feet were torn and bleeding, and he could only hold on now with his
hands. Evening closed in, and he strained his eyes to see if he could
behold the top of the mountain. Then he gazed beneath him, and what a
sight met his eyes! A yawning abyss, with certain and terrible death at
the bottom, reeking with half-decayed bodies of horses and riders! And
this had been the end of all the other brave men who like himself had
attempted the ascent.

It was almost pitch dark now, and only the stars lit up the Glass
Mountain. The poor boy still clung on as if glued to the glass by his
blood-stained hands. He made no struggle to get higher, for all his
strength had left him, and seeing no hope he calmly awaited death.
Then all of a sudden he fell into a deep sleep, and forgetful of his
dangerous position, he slumbered sweetly. But all the same, although he
slept, he had stuck his sharp claws so firmly into the glass that he was
quite safe not to fall.

Now the golden apple-tree was guarded by the eagle which had overthrown
the golden knight and his horse. Every night it flew round the Glass
Mountain keeping a careful look-out, and no sooner had the moon emerged
from the clouds than the bird rose up from the apple-tree, and circling
round in the air, caught sight of the sleeping youth.

Greedy for carrion, and sure that this must be a fresh corpse, the bird
swooped down upon the boy. But he was awake now, and perceiving the
eagle, he determined by its help to save himself.

The eagle dug its sharp claws into the tender flesh of the youth, but he
bore the pain without a sound, and seized the bird’s two feet with his
hands. The creature in terror lifted him high up into the air and began
to circle round the tower of the castle. The youth held on bravely. He
saw the glittering palace, which by the pale rays of the moon looked
like a dim lamp; and he saw the high windows, and round one of them a
balcony in which the beautiful Princess sat lost in sad thoughts. Then
the boy saw that he was close to the apple-tree, and drawing a small
knife from his belt, he cut off both the eagle’s feet. The bird rose up
in the air in its agony and vanished into the clouds, and the youth fell
on to the broad branches of the apple-tree.

Then he drew out the claws of the eagle’s feet that had remained in his
flesh, and put the peel of one of the golden apples on the wound, and
in one moment it was healed and well again. He pulled several of the
beautiful apples and put them in his pocket; then he entered the castle.
The door was guarded by a great dragon, but as soon as he threw an apple
at it, the beast vanished.

At the same moment a gate opened, and the youth perceived a courtyard
full of flowers and beautiful trees, and on a balcony sat the lovely
enchanted Princess with her retinue.

As soon as she saw the youth, she ran towards him and greeted him as her
husband and master. She gave him all her treasures, and the youth became
a rich and mighty ruler. But he never returned to the earth, for only
the mighty eagle, who had been the guardian of the Princess and of the
castle, could have carried on his wings the enormous treasure down to
the world. But as the eagle had lost its feet it died, and its body was
found in a wood on the Glass Mountain.

. . . . . . .

One day when the youth was strolling about in the palace garden with the
Princess, his wife, he looked down over the edge of the Glass Mountain
and saw to his astonishment a great number of people gathered there. He
blew his silver whistle, and the swallow who acted as messenger in the
golden castle flew past.

‘Fly down and ask what the matter is,’ he said to the little bird, who
sped off like lightning and soon returned saying:

‘The blood of the eagle has restored all the people below to life. All
those who have perished on this mountain are awakening up to-day, as
it were from a sleep, and are mounting their horses, and the whole
population are gazing on this unheard-of wonder with joy and amazement.’




 ALPHEGE, OR THE GREEN MONKEY

Many years ago there lived a King, who was twice married. His first
wife, a good and beautiful woman, died at the birth of her little son,
and the King her husband was so overwhelmed with grief at her loss that
his only comfort was in the sight of his heir.

When the time for the young Prince’s christening came the King chose
as godmother a neighbouring Princess, so celebrated for her wisdom and
goodness that she was commonly called ‘the Good Queen.’ She named the
baby Alphege, and from that moment took him to her heart.

Time wipes away the greatest griefs, and after two or three years the
King married again. His second wife was a Princess of undeniable beauty,
but by no means of so amiable a disposition as the first Queen. In due
time a second Prince was born, and the Queen was devoured with rage at
the thought that Prince Alphege came between her son and the throne. She
took care however to conceal her jealous feelings from the King.

At length she could control herself no longer, so she sent a trusty
servant to her old and faithful friend the Fairy of the Mountain, to beg
her to devise some means by which she might get rid of her stepson.

The Fairy replied that, much as she desired to be agreeable to the Queen
in every way, it was impossible for her to attempt anything against the
young Prince, who was under the protection of some greater Power than
her own.

The ‘Good Queen’ on her side watched carefully over her godson. She was
obliged to do so from a distance, her own country being a remote one,
but she was well informed of all that went on and knew all about the
Queen’s wicked designs. She therefore sent the Prince a large and
splendid ruby, with injunctions to wear it night and day as it would
protect him from all attacks, but added that the talisman only retained
its power as long as the Prince remained within his father’s dominions.
The Wicked Queen knowing this made every attempt to get the Prince out
of the country, but her efforts failed, till one day accident did what
she was unable to accomplish.

The King had an only sister who was deeply attached to him, and who was
married to the sovereign of a distant country. She had always kept up
a close correspondence with her brother, and the accounts she heard of
Prince Alphege made her long to become acquainted with so charming a
nephew. She entreated the King to allow the Prince to visit her, and
after some hesitation which was overruled by his wife, he finally
consented.

Prince Alphege was at this time fourteen years old, and the handsomest
and most engaging youth imaginable. In his infancy he had been placed
in the charge of one of the great ladies of the Court, who, according
to the prevailing custom, acted first as his head nurse and then as his
governess. When he outgrew her care her husband was appointed as his
tutor and governor, so that he had never been separated from this
excellent couple, who loved him as tenderly as they did their only
daughter Zayda, and were warmly loved by him in return.

When the Prince set forth on his travels it was but natural that this
devoted couple should accompany him, and accordingly he started with
them and attended by a numerous retinue.

For some time he travelled through his father’s dominions and all went
well; but soon after passing the frontier they had to cross a desert
plain under a burning sun. They were glad to take shelter under a group
of trees near, and here the Prince complained of burning thirst. Luckily
a tiny stream ran close by and some water was soon procured, but no
sooner had he tasted it than he sprang from his carriage and disappeared
in a moment. In vain did his anxious followers seek for him, he was
nowhere to be found.

As they were hunting and shouting through the trees a black monkey
suddenly appeared on a point of rock and said: ‘Poor sorrowing people,
you are seeking your Prince in vain. Return to your own country and know
that he will not be restored to you till you have for some time failed
to recognise him.’

With these words he vanished, leaving the courtiers sadly perplexed; but
as all their efforts to find the Prince were useless they had no choice
but to go home, bringing with them the sad news, which so greatly
distressed the King that he fell ill and died not long after.

The Queen, whose ambition was boundless, was delighted to see the crown
on her son’s head and to have the power in her own hands. Her hard rule
made her very unpopular, and it was commonly believed that she had
made away with Prince Alphege. Indeed, had the King her son not been
deservedly beloved a revolution would certainly have arisen.

Meantime the former governess of the unfortunate Alphege, who had lost
her husband soon after the King’s death, retired to her own house with
her daughter, who grew up a lovely and most loveable girl, and both
continued to mourn the loss of their dear Prince.

The young King was devoted to hunting, and often indulged in his
favourite pastime, attended by the noblest youths in his kingdom.

One day, after a long morning’s chase he stopped to rest near a brook in
the shade of a little wood, where a splendid tent had been prepared
for him. Whilst at luncheon he suddenly spied a little monkey of the
brightest green sitting on a tree and gazing so tenderly at him that
he felt quite moved. He forbade his courtiers to frighten it, and the
monkey, noticing how much attention was being paid him, sprang from
bough to bough, and at length gradually approached the King, who offered
him some food. The monkey took it very daintily and finally came to the
table. The King took him on his knees, and, delighted with his capture,
brought him home with him. He would trust no one else with its care, and
the whole Court soon talked of nothing but the pretty green monkey.

One morning, as Prince Alphege’s governess and her daughter were alone
together, the little monkey sprang in through an open window. He had
escaped from the palace, and his manners were so gentle and caressing
that Zayda and her mother soon got over the first fright he had given
them. He had spent some time with them and quite won their hearts by
his insinuating ways, when the King discovered where he was and sent to
fetch him back. But the monkey made such piteous cries, and seemed so
unhappy when anyone attempted to catch him, that the two ladies begged
the King to leave him a little longer with them, to which he consented.

One evening, as they sat by the fountain in the garden, the little
monkey kept gazing at Zayda with such sad and loving eyes that she and
her mother could not think what to make of it, and they were still more
surprised when they saw big tears rolling down his cheeks.

Next day both mother and daughter were sitting in a jessamine bower in
the garden, and they began to talk of the green monkey and his strange
ways. The mother said, ‘My dear child, I can no longer hide my feelings
from you. I cannot get the thought out of my mind that the green monkey
is no other than our beloved Prince Alphege, transformed in this strange
fashion. I know the idea sounds wild, but I cannot get it out of my
heart, and it leaves me no peace.’

As she spoke she glanced up, and there sat the little monkey, whose
tears and gestures seemed to confirm her words.

The following night the elder lady dreamt that she saw the Good Queen,
who said, ‘Do not weep any longer but follow my directions. Go into
your garden and lift up the little marble slab at the foot of the great
myrtle tree. You will find beneath it a crystal vase filled with a
bright green liquid. Take it with you and place the thing which is at
present most in your thoughts into a bath filled with roses and rub it
well with the green liquid.’

At these words the sleeper awoke, and lost no time in rising and
hurrying to the garden, where she found all as the Good Queen had
described. Then she hastened to rouse her daughter and together they
prepared the bath, for they would not let their women know what they
were about. Zayda gathered quantities of roses, and when all was ready
they put the monkey into a large jasper bath, where the mother rubbed
him all over with the green liquid.

Their suspense was not long, for suddenly the monkey skin dropped off,
and there stood Prince Alphege, the handsomest and most charming of
men. The joy of such a meeting was beyond words. After a time the ladies
begged the Prince to relate his adventures, and he told them of all his
sufferings in the desert when he was first transformed. His only comfort
had been in visits from the Good Queen, who had at length put him in the
way of meeting his brother.

Several days were spent in these interesting conversations, but at
length Zayda’s mother began to think of the best means for placing the
Prince on the throne, which was his by right.

The Queen on her side was feeling very anxious. She had felt sure from
the first that her son’s pet monkey was no other than Prince Alphege,
and she longed to put an end to him. Her suspicions were confirmed by
the Fairy of the Mountain, and she hastened in tears to the King, her
son.

‘I am informed,’ she cried, ‘that some ill-disposed people have raised
up an impostor in the hopes of dethroning you. You must at once have him
put to death.’

The King, who was very brave, assured the Queen that he would soon
punish the conspirators. He made careful inquiries into the matter, and
thought it hardly probable that a quiet widow and a young girl would
think of attempting anything of the nature of a revolution.

He determined to go and see them, and to find out the truth for himself;
so one night, without saying anything to the Queen or his ministers, he
set out for the palace where the two ladies lived, attended only by a
small band of followers.

The two ladies were at the moment deep in conversation with Prince
Alphege, and hearing a knocking so late at night begged him to keep out
of sight for a time. What was their surprise when the door was opened to
see the King and his suite.

‘I know,’ said the King, ‘that you are plotting against my crown and
person, and I have come to have an explanation with you.’

As she was about to answer Prince Alphege, who had heard all, came
forward and said, ‘It is from me you must ask an explanation, brother.’
He spoke with such grace and dignity that everyone gazed at him with
mute surprise.

At length the King, recovering from his astonishment at recognising the
brother who had been lost some years before, exclaimed, ‘Yes, you are
indeed my brother, and now that I have found you, take the throne to
which I have no longer a right.’ So saying, he respectfully kissed the
Prince’s hand.

Alphege threw himself into his arms, and the brothers hastened to the
royal palace, where in the presence of the entire court he received
the crown from his brother’s hand. To clear away any possible doubt, he
showed the ruby which the Good Queen had given him in his childhood. As
they were gazing at it, it suddenly split with a loud noise, and at the
same moment the Wicked Queen expired.

King Alphege lost no time in marrying his dear and lovely Zayda, and
his joy was complete when the Good Queen appeared at his wedding. She
assured him that the Fairy of the Mountain had henceforth lost all
power over him, and after spending some time with the young couple,
and bestowing the most costly presents on them, she retired to her own
country.

King Alphege insisted on his brother sharing his throne, and they all
lived to a good old age, universally beloved and admired.




 FAIRER-THAN-A-FAIRY

Once there lived a King who had no children for many years after his
marriage. At length heaven granted him a daughter of such remarkable
beauty that he could think of no name so appropriate for her as
‘Fairer-than-a-Fairy.’

It never occurred to the good-natured monarch that such a name was
certain to call down the hatred and jealousy of the fairies in a body on
the child, but this was what happened. No sooner had they heard of this
presumptuous name than they resolved to gain possession of her who bore
it, and either to torment her cruelly, or at least to conceal her from
the eyes of all men.

The eldest of their tribe was entrusted to carry out their revenge. This
Fairy was named Lagree; she was so old that she only had one eye and one
tooth left, and even these poor remains she had to keep all night in a
strengthening liquid. She was also so spiteful that she gladly devoted
all her time to carrying out all the mean or ill-natured tricks of the
whole body of fairies.

With her large experience, added to her native spite, she found but
little difficulty in carrying off Fairer-than-a-Fairy. The poor child,
who was only seven years old, nearly died of fear on finding herself
in the power of this hideous creature. However, when after an hour’s
journey underground she found herself in a splendid palace with lovely
gardens, she felt a little reassured, and was further cheered when she
discovered that her pet cat and dog had followed her.

The old Fairy led her to a pretty room which she said should be hers, at
the same time giving her the strictest orders never to let out the fire
which was burning brightly in the grate. She then gave two glass bottles
into the Princess’s charge, desiring her to take the greatest care of
them, and having enforced her orders with the most awful threats in case
of disobedience, she vanished, leaving the little girl at liberty to
explore the palace and grounds and a good deal relieved at having only
two apparently easy tasks set her.

Several years passed, during which time the Princess grew accustomed to
her lonely life, obeyed the Fairy’s orders, and by degrees forgot all
about the court of the King her father.

One day, whilst passing near a fountain in the garden, she noticed
that the sun’s rays fell on the water in such a manner as to produce
a brilliant rainbow. She stood still to admire it, when, to her great
surprise, she heard a voice addressing her which seemed to come from the
centre of its rays. The voice was that of a young man, and its sweetness
of tone and the agreeable things it uttered, led one to infer that its
owner must be equally charming; but this had to be a mere matter of
fancy, for no one was visible.

The beautiful Rainbow informed Fairer-than-a-Fairy that he was young,
the son of a powerful king, and that the Fairy, Lagree, who owed his
parents a grudge, had revenged herself by depriving him of his natural
shape for some years; that she had imprisoned him in the palace, where
he had found his confinement hard to bear for some time, but now, he
owned, he no longer sighed for freedom since he had seen and learned to
love Fairer-than-a-Fairy.

He added many other tender speeches to this declaration, and the
Princess, to whom such remarks were a new experience, could not help
feeling pleased and touched by his attentions.

The Prince could only appear or speak under the form of a Rainbow, and
it was therefore necessary that the sun should shine on water so as to
enable the rays to form themselves.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy lost no moment in which she could meet her lover,
and they enjoyed many long and interesting interviews. One day, however,
their conversation became so absorbing and time passed so quickly that
the Princess forgot to attend to the fire, and it went out. Lagree, on
her return, soon found out the neglect, and seemed only too pleased to
have the opportunity of showing her spite to her lovely prisoner. She
ordered Fairer-than-a-Fairy to start next day at dawn to ask Locrinos
for fire with which to relight the one she had allowed to go out.

Now this Locrinos was a cruel monster who devoured everyone he came
across, and especially enjoyed a chance of catching and eating any young
girls. Our heroine obeyed with great sweetness, and without having been
able to take leave of her lover she set off to go to Locrinos as to
certain death. As she was crossing a wood a bird sang to her to pick up
a shining pebble which she would find in a fountain close by, and to use
it when needed. She took the bird’s advice, and in due time arrived at
the house of Locrinos. Luckily she only found his wife at home, who was
much struck by the Princess’s youth and beauty and sweet gentle manners,
and still further impressed by the present of the shining pebble.

She readily let Fairer-than-a-Fairy have the fire, and in return for
the stone she gave her another, which, she said, might prove useful some
day. Then she sent her away without doing her any harm.

Lagree was as much surprised as displeased at the happy result of this
expedition, and Fairer-than-a Fairy waited anxiously for an opportunity
of meeting Prince Rainbow and telling him her adventures. She found,
however, that he had already been told all about them by a Fairy who
protected him, and to whom he was related.

The dread of fresh dangers to his beloved Princess made him devise
some more convenient way of meeting than by the garden fountain, and
Fairer-than-a-Fairy carried out his plan daily with entire success.
Every morning she placed a large basin full of water on her window-sill,
and as soon as the sun’s rays fell on the water the Rainbow appeared
as clearly as it had ever done in the fountain. By this means they were
able to meet without losing sight of the fire or of the two bottles in
which the old Fairy kept her eye and her tooth at night, and for some
time the lovers enjoyed every hour of sunshine together.

One day Prince Rainbow appeared in the depths of woe. He had just heard
that he was to be banished from this lovely spot, but he had no idea
where he was to go. The poor young couple were in despair, and only
parted with the last ray of sunshine, and in hopes of meeting next
morning. Alas! next day was dark and gloomy, and it was only late in the
afternoon that the sun broke through the clouds for a few minutes.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy eagerly ran to the window, but in her haste she
upset the basin, and spilt all the water with which she had carefully
filled it overnight. No other water was at hand except that in the two
bottles. It was the only chance of seeing her lover before they were
separated, and she did not hesitate to break the bottle and pour their
contents into the basin, when the Rainbow appeared at once. Their
farewells were full of tenderness; the Prince made the most ardent and
sincere protestations, and promised to neglect nothing which might help
to deliver his dear Fairer-than-a-Fairy from her captivity, and implored
her to consent to their marriage as soon as they should both be free.
The Princess, on her side, vowed to have no other husband, and declared
herself willing to brave death itself in order to rejoin him.

They were not allowed much time for their adieus; the Rainbow vanished,
and the Princess, resolved to run all risks, started off at once, taking
nothing with her but her dog, her cat, a sprig of myrtle, and the stone
which the wife of Locrinos gave her.

When Lagree became aware of her prisoner’s flight she was furious, and
set off at full speed in pursuit. She overtook her just as the poor
girl, overcome by fatigue, had lain down to rest in a cave which the
stone had formed itself into to shelter her. The little dog who was
watching her mistress promptly flew at Lagree and bit her so severely
that she stumbled against a corner of the cave and broke off her only
tooth. Before she had recovered from the pain and rage this caused her,
the Princess had time to escape, and was some way on her road. Fear gave
her strength for some time, but at last she could go no further, and
sank down to rest. As she did so, the sprig of myrtle she carried
touched the ground, and immediately a green and shady bower sprang up
round her, in which she hoped to sleep in peace.

But Lagree had not given up her pursuit, and arrived just as
Fairer-than-a-Fairy had fallen fast asleep. This time she made sure of
catching her victim, but the cat spied her out, and, springing from one
of the boughs of the arbour she flew at Lagree’s face and tore out her
only eye, thus delivering the Princess for ever from her persecutor.

One might have thought that all would now be well, but no sooner had
Lagree been put to fight than our heroine was overwhelmed with hunger
and thirst. She felt as though she should certainly expire, and it was
with some difficulty that she dragged herself as far as a pretty little
green and white house, which stood at no great distance. Here she was
received by a beautiful lady dressed in green and white to match the
house, which apparently belonged to her, and of which she seemed the
only inhabitant.

She greeted the fainting Princess most kindly, gave her an excellent
supper, and after a long night’s rest in a delightful bed told her that
after many troubles she should finally attain her desire.

As the green and white lady took leave of the Princess she gave her a
nut, desiring her only to open it in the most urgent need.

After a long and tiring journey Fairer-than-a-Fairy was once more
received in a house, and by a lady exactly like the one she had quitted.
Here again she received a present with the same injunctions, but instead
of a nut this lady gave her a golden pomegranate. The mournful Princess
had to continue her weary way, and after many troubles and hardships she
again found rest and shelter in a third house exactly similar to the two
others.

These houses belonged to three sisters, all endowed with fairy gifts,
and all so alike in mind and person that they wished their houses and
garments to be equally alike. Their occupation consisted in helping
those in misfortune, and they were as gentle and benevolent as Lagree
had been cruel and spiteful.

The third Fairy comforted the poor traveller, begged her not to lose
heart, and assured her that her troubles should be rewarded.

She accompanied her advice by the gift of a crystal smelling-bottle,
with strict orders only to open it in case of urgent need.
Fairer-than-a-Fairy thanked her warmly, and resumed her way cheered by
pleasant thoughts.

After a time her road led through a wood, full of soft airs and sweet
odours, and before she had gone a hundred yards she saw a wonderful
silver Castle suspended by strong silver chains to four of the
largest trees. It was so perfectly hung that a gentle breeze rocked it
sufficiently to send you pleasantly to sleep.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy felt a strong desire to enter this Castle, but
besides being hung a little above the ground there seemed to be neither
doors nor windows. She had no doubt (though really I cannot think why)
that the moment had come in which to use the nut which had been given
her. She opened it, and out came a diminutive hall porter at whose belt
hung a tiny chain, at the end of which was a golden key half as long as
the smallest pin you ever saw.

The Princess climbed up one of the silver chains, holding in her hand
the little porter who, in spite of his minute size, opened a secret door
with his golden key and let her in. She entered a magnificent room which
appeared to occupy the entire Castle, and which was lighted by gold and
jewelled stars in the ceiling. In the midst of this room stood a couch,
draped with curtains of all the colours of the rainbow, and suspended by
golden cords so that it swayed with the Castle in a manner which rocked
its occupant delightfully to sleep.

On this elegant couch lay Prince Rainbow, looking more beautiful than
ever, and sunk in profound slumber, in which he had been held ever since
his disappearance.

Fairy-than-a-Fairy, who now saw him for the first time in his real
shape, hardly dared to gaze at him, fearing lest his appearance might
not be in keeping with the voice and language which had won her heart.
At the same time she could not help feeling rather hurt at the apparent
indifference with which she was received.

She related all the dangers and difficulties she had gone through, and
though she repeated the story twenty times in a loud clear voice, the
Prince slept on and took no heed. She then had recourse to the golden
pomegranate, and on opening it found that all the seeds were as many
little violins which flew up in the vaulted roof and at once began
playing melodiously.

The Prince was not completely roused, but he opened his eyes a little
and looked all the handsomer.

Impatient at not being recognised, Fairer-than-a-Fairy now drew out her
third present, and on opening the crystal scent-bottle a little syren
flew out, who silenced the violins and then sang close to the Prince’s
ear the story of all his lady love had suffered in her search for him.
She added some gentle reproaches to her tale, but before she had got
far he was wide awake, and transported with joy threw himself at the
Princess’s feet. At the same moment the walls of the room expanded and
opened out, revealing a golden throne covered with jewels. A magnificent
Court now began to assemble, and at the same time several elegant
carriages filled with ladies in magnificent dresses drove up. In the
first and most splendid of these carriages sat Prince Rainbow’s mother.
She fondly embraced her son, after which she informed him that his
father had been dead for some years, that the anger of the Fairies was
at length appeased, and that he might return in peace to reign over his
people, who were longing for his presence.

The Court received the new King with joyful acclamations which would
have delighted him at any other time, but all his thoughts were full of
Fairer-than-a-Fairy. He was just about to present her to his mother and
the Court, feeling sure that her charms would win all hearts, when the
three green and white sisters appeared.

They declared the secret of Fairy-than-a-Fairy’s royal birth, and the
Queen taking the two lovers in her carriage set off with them for the
capital of the kingdom.

Here they were received with tumultuous joy. The wedding was celebrated
without delay, and succeeding years diminished neither the virtues,
beauty, nor the mutual affection of King Rainbow and his Queen,
Fairer-than-a-Fairy.




 THE THREE BROTHERS(17)

(17) From the Polish. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a witch, who in the shape of a hawk used
every night to break the windows of a certain village church. In the
same village there lived three brothers, who were all determined to kill
the mischievous hawk. But in vain did the two eldest mount guard in the
church with their guns; as soon as the bird appeared high above their
heads, sleep overpowered them, and they only awoke to hear the windows
crashing in.

Then the youngest brother took his turn of guarding the windows, and to
prevent his being overcome by sleep he placed a lot of thorns under his
chin, so that if he felt drowsy and nodded his head, they would prick
him and keep him awake.

The moon was already risen, and it was as light as day, when suddenly he
heard a fearful noise, and at the same time a terrible desire to sleep
overpowered him.

His eyelids closed, and his head sank on his shoulders, but the thorns
ran into him and were so painful that he awoke at once. He saw the hawk
swooping down upon the church, and in a moment he had seized his gun
and shot at the bird. The hawk fell heavily under a big stone, severely
wounded in its right wing. The youth ran to look at it, and saw that
a huge abyss had opened below the stone. He went at once to fetch his
brothers, and with their help dragged a lot of pine-wood and ropes to
the spot. They fastened some of the burning pine-wood to the end of the
rope, and let it slowly down to the bottom of the abyss. At first it was
quite dark, and the flaming torch only lit up dirty grey stone walls.
But the youngest brother determined to explore the abyss, and letting
himself down by the rope he soon reached the bottom. Here he found a
lovely meadow full of green trees and exquisite flowers.

In the middle of the meadow stood a huge stone castle, with an iron gate
leading to it, which was wide open. Everything in the castle seemed
to be made of copper, and the only inhabitant he could discover was
a lovely girl, who was combing her golden hair; and he noticed that
whenever one of her hairs fell on the ground it rang out like pure
metal. The youth looked at her more closely, and saw that her skin was
smooth and fair, her blue eyes bright and sparkling, and her hair as
golden as the sun. He fell in love with her on the spot, and kneeling at
her feet, he implored her to become his wife.

The lovely girl accepted his proposal gladly; but at the same time she
warned him that she could never come up to the world above till her
mother, the old witch, was dead. And she went on to tell him that the
only way in which the old creature could be killed was with the sword
that hung up in the castle; but the sword was so heavy that no one could
lift it.

Then the youth went into a room in the castle where everything was made
of silver, and here he found another beautiful girl, the sister of his
bride. She was combing her silver hair, and every hair that fell on the
ground rang out like pure metal. The second girl handed him the sword,
but though he tried with all his strength he could not lift it. At last
a third sister came to him and gave him a drop of something to drink,
which she said would give him the needful strength. He drank one drop,
but still he could not lift the sword; then he drank a second, and the
sword began to move; but only after he had drunk a third drop was he
able to swing the sword over his head.

Then he hid himself in the castle and awaited the old witch’s arrival.
At last as it was beginning to grow dark she appeared. She swooped down
upon a big apple-tree, and after shaking some golden apples from it, she
pounced down upon the earth. As soon as her feet touched the ground she
became transformed from a hawk into a woman. This was the moment the
youth was waiting for, and he swung his mighty sword in the air with all
his strength and the witch’s head fell off, and her blood spurted up on
the walls.

Without fear of any further danger, he packed up all the treasures of
the castle into great chests, and gave his brothers a signal to pull
them up out of the abyss. First the treasures were attached to the rope
and then the three lovely girls. And now everything was up above and
only he himself remained below. But as he was a little suspicious of his
brothers, he fastened a heavy stone on to the rope and let them pull it
up. At first they heaved with a will, but when the stone was half way
up they let it drop suddenly, and it fell to the bottom broken into a
hundred pieces.

‘So that’s what would have happened to my bones had I trusted myself to
them,’ said the youth sadly; and he began to cry bitterly, not because
of the treasures, but because of the lovely girl with her swanlike neck
and golden hair.

For a long time he wandered sadly all through the beautiful underworld,
and one day he met a magician who asked him the cause of his tears. The
youth told him all that had befallen him, and the magician said:

‘Do not grieve, young man! If you will guard the children who are hidden
in the golden apple-tree, I will bring you at once up to the earth.
Another magician who lives in this land always eats my children up. It
is in vain that I have hidden them under the earth and locked them into
the castle. Now I have hidden them in the apple-tree; hide yourself
there too, and at midnight you will see my enemy.’

The youth climbed up the tree, and picked some of the beautiful golden
apples, which he ate for his supper.

At midnight the wind began to rise, and a rustling sound was heard at
the foot of the tree. The youth looked down and beheld a long thick
serpent beginning to crawl up the tree. It wound itself round the stem
and gradually got higher and higher. It stretched its huge head, in
which the eyes glittered fiercely, among the branches, searching for the
nest in which the little children lay. They trembled with terror when
they saw the hideous creature, and hid themselves beneath the leaves.

Then the youth swung his mighty sword in the air, and with one blow cut
off the serpent’s head. He cut up the rest of the body into little bits
and strewed them to the four winds.

The father of the rescued children was so delighted over the death of
his enemy that he told the youth to get on his back, and in this way he
carried him up to the world above.

With what joy did he hurry now to his brothers’ house! He burst into a
room where they were all assembled, but no one knew who he was. Only his
bride, who was serving as cook to her sisters, recognised her lover at
once.

His brothers, who had quite believed he was dead, yielded him up his
treasures at once, and flew into the woods in terror. But the good youth
forgave them all they had done, and divided his treasures with them.
Then he built himself a big castle with golden windows, and there he
lived happily with his golden-haired wife till the end of their lives.




 THE BOY AND THE WOLVES, OR THE BROKEN PROMISE(18)

(18) A North American Indian story.

Once upon a time an Indian hunter built himself a house in the middle
of a great forest, far away from all his tribe; for his heart was gentle
and kind, and he was weary of the treachery and cruel deeds of those
who had been his friends. So he left them, and took his wife and three
children, and they journeyed on until they found a spot near to a clear
stream, where they began to cut down trees, and to make ready their
wigwam. For many years they lived peacefully and happily in this
sheltered place, never leaving it except to hunt the wild animals, which
served them both for food and clothes. At last, however, the strong man
felt sick, and before long he knew he must die.

So he gathered his family round him, and said his last words to them.
‘You, my wife, the companion of my days, will follow me ere many moons
have waned to the island of the blest. But for you, O my children, whose
lives are but newly begun, the wickedness, unkindness, and ingratitude
from which I fled are before you. Yet I shall go hence in peace, my
children, if you will promise always to love each other, and never to
forsake your youngest brother.

‘Never!’ they replied, holding out their hands. And the hunter died
content.

Scarcely eight moons had passed when, just as he had said, the wife went
forth, and followed her husband; but before leaving her children she
bade the two elder ones think of their promise never to forsake the
younger, for he was a child, and weak. And while the snow lay thick upon
the ground, they tended him and cherished him; but when the earth showed
green again, the heart of the young man stirred within him, and he
longed to see the wigwams of the village where his father’s youth was
spent.

Therefore he opened all his heart to his sister, who answered: ‘My
brother, I understand your longing for our fellow-men, whom here we
cannot see. But remember our father’s words. Shall we not seek our own
pleasures, and forget the little one?’

But he would not listen, and, making no reply, he took his bow and
arrows and left the hut. The snows fell and melted, yet he never
returned; and at last the heart of the girl grew cold and hard, and her
little boy became a burden in her eyes, till one day she spoke thus to
him: ‘See, there is food for many days to come. Stay here within the
shelter of the hut. I go to seek our brother, and when I have found him
I shall return hither.’

But when, after hard journeying, she reached the village where her
brother dwelt, and saw that he had a wife and was happy, and when she,
too, was sought by a young brave, then she also forgot the boy alone in
the forest, and thought only of her husband.

Now as soon as the little boy had eaten all the food which his sister
had left him, he went out into the woods, and gathered berries and dug
up roots, and while the sun shone he was contented and had his fill. But
when the snows began and the wind howled, then his stomach felt empty
and his limbs cold, and he hid in trees all the night, and only crept
out to eat what the wolves had left behind. And by-and-by, having no
other friends, he sought their company, and sat by while they devoured
their prey, and they grew to know him, and gave him food. And without
them he would have died in the snow.

But at last the snows melted, and the ice upon the great lake, and
as the wolves went down to the shore, the boy went after them. And it
happened one day that his big brother was fishing in his canoe near the
shore, and he heard the voice of a child singing in the Indian tone--

     ‘My brother, my brother!
      I am becoming a wolf,
      I am becoming a wolf!’

And when he had so sung he howled as wolves howl. Then the heart of
the elder sunk, and he hastened towards him, crying, ‘Brother, little
brother, come to me;’ but he, being half a wolf, only continued his
song. And the louder the elder called him, ‘Brother, little brother,
come to me,’ the swifter he fled after his brothers the wolves, and
the heavier grew his skin, till, with a long howl, he vanished into the
depths of the forest.

So, with shame and anguish in his soul, the elder brother went back to
his village, and, with his sister, mourned the little boy and the broken
promise till the end of his life.




 THE GLASS AXE(19)

(19) From the Hungarian. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a King and Queen who had everything they
could possibly wish for in this world except a child. At last, after
twelve years, the Queen gave birth to a son; but she did not live long
to enjoy her happiness, for on the following day she died. But before
her death she called her husband to her and said, ‘Never let the child
put his feet on the ground, for as soon as he does so he will fall into
the power of a wicked Fairy, who will do him much harm.’ And these were
the last words the poor Queen spoke.

The boy throve and grew big, and when he was too heavy for his nurse
to carry, a chair was made for him on little wheels, in which he could
wander through the palace gardens without help; at other times he was
carried about on a litter, and he was always carefully watched and
guarded for fear he should at any time put his feet to the ground.

But as this sort of life was bad for his health, the doctors ordered him
horse exercise, and he soon became a first-rate rider, and used to go
out for long excursions on horseback, accompanied always by his father’s
stud-groom and a numerous retinue.

Every day he rode through the neighbouring fields and woods, and always
returned home in the evening safe and well. In this way many years
passed, and the Prince grew to manhood, and hardly anyone remembered the
Queen’s warning, though precautions were still taken, more from use and
wont than for any other reason.

One day the Prince and his suite went out for a ride in a wood where his
father sometimes held a hunt. Their way led through a stream whose banks
were overgrown with thick brushwood. Just as the horsemen were about
to ford the river, a hare, startled by the sound of the horses’ hoofs,
started up from the grass and ran towards the thicket. The young Prince
pursued the little creature, and had almost overtaken it, when the girth
of his saddle suddenly broke in two and he fell heavily to the ground.
No sooner had his foot touched the earth than he disappeared before the
eyes of the horrified courtiers.

They sought for him far and near, but all in vain, and they were forced
to recognise the power of the evil Fairy, against which the Queen had
warned them on her death-bed. The old King was much grieved when they
brought him the news of his son’s disappearance, but as he could do
nothing to free him from his fate, he gave himself up to an old age of
grief and loneliness, cherishing at the same time the hope that some
lucky chance might one day deliver the youth out of the hands of his
enemy.

Hardly had the Prince touched the ground than he felt himself violently
seized by an unseen power, and hurried away he knew not whither. A whole
new world stretched out before him, quite unlike the one he had left.
A splendid castle surrounded by a huge lake was the abode of the Fairy,
and the only approach to it was over a bridge of clouds. On the other
side of the lake high mountains rose up, and dark woods stretched
along the banks; over all hung a thick mist, and deep silence reigned
everywhere.

No sooner had the Fairy reached her own domain than she made herself
visible, and turning to the Prince she told him that unless he obeyed
all her commands down to the minutest detail he would be severely
punished. Then she gave him an axe made of glass, and bade him cross the
bridge of clouds and go into the wood beyond and cut down all the trees
there before sunset. At the same time she cautioned him with many angry
words against speaking to a black girl he would most likely meet in the
wood.

The Prince listened to her words meekly, and when she had finished took
up the glass axe and set out for the forest. At every step he seemed to
sink into the clouds, but fear gave wings to his feet, and he crossed
the lake in safety and set to work at once.

But no sooner had he struck the first blow with his axe than it broke
into a thousand pieces against the tree. The poor youth was so terrified
he did not know what to do, for he was in mortal dread of the punishment
the wicked old Fairy would inflict on him. He wandered to and fro in the
wood, not knowing where he was going, and at last, worn out by fatigue
and misery, he sank on the ground and fell fast asleep.

He did not know how long he had slept when a sudden sound awoke him, and
opening his eyes he saw a black girl standing beside him. Mindful of
the Fairy’s warning he did not dare to address her, but she on her part
greeted him in the most friendly manner, and asked him at once if he
were under the power of the wicked Fairy. The Prince nodded his head
silently in answer.

Then the black girl told him that she too was in the power of the Fairy,
who had doomed her to wander about in her present guise until some youth
should take pity on her and bear her in safety to the other side of the
river which they saw in the distance, and on the other side of which the
Fairy’s domain and power ended.

The girl’s words so inspired the Prince with confidence that he told her
all his tale of woe, and ended up by asking her advice as to how he was
to escape the punishment the Fairy would be sure to inflict on him when
she discovered that he had not cut down the trees in the wood and that
he had broken her axe.

‘You must know,’ answered the black girl, ‘that the Fairy in whose power
we both are is my own mother, but you must not betray this secret, for
it would cost me my life. If you will only promise to try and free me
I will stand by you, and will accomplish for you all the tasks which my
mother sets you.’

The Prince promised joyfully all she asked; then having once more warned
him not to betray her confidence, she handed him a draught to drink
which very soon sunk his senses in a deep slumber.

His astonishment was great when he awoke to find the glass axe whole and
unbroken at his side, and all the trees of the wood lying felled around
him!

He made all haste across the bridge of clouds, and told the Fairy that
her commands were obeyed. She was much amazed when she heard that all
the wood was cut down, and saw the axe unbroken in his hand, and
since she could not believe that he had done all this by himself, she
questioned him narrowly if he had seen or spoken to the black girl. But
the Prince lied manfully, and swore he had never looked up from his work
for a moment. Seeing she could get nothing more out of him, she gave him
a little bread and water, and showing him to a small dark cupboard she
told him he might sleep there.

Morning had hardly dawned when the Fairy awoke the Prince, and giving
him the glass axe again she told him to cut up all the wood he had
felled the day before, and to put it in bundles ready for firewood; at
the same time she warned him once more against approaching or speaking a
word to the black girl if he met her in the wood.

Although his task was no easier than that of the day before, the youth
set out much more cheerfully, because he knew he could count an the help
of the black girl. With quicker and lighter step he crossed the bridge
of clouds, and hardly had he reached the other side than his friend
stood before him and greeted him cheerfully. When she heard what the
Fairy demanded this time, she answered smilingly, ‘Never fear,’ and
handed him another draught, which very soon caused the Prince to sink
into a deep sleep.

When he awoke everything, was done. All the trees of the wood were cut
up into firewood and arranged in bundles ready for use.

He returned to the castle as quickly as he could, and told the Fairy
that her commands were obeyed. She was even more amazed than she had
been before, and asked him again if he had either seen or spoken to the
black girl; but the Prince knew better than to betray his word, and once
more lied freely.

On the following day the Fairy set him a third task to do, even harder
than the other two. She told him he must build a castle on the other
side of the lake, made of nothing but gold, silver, and precious stones,
and unless he could accomplish this within an hour, the most frightful
doom awaited him.

The Prince heard her words without anxiety, so entirely did he rely on
the help of his black friend. Full of hope he hurried across the bridge,
and recognised at once the spot where the castle was to stand, for
spades, hammers, axes, and every other building implement lay scattered
on the ground ready for the workman’s hand, but of gold, silver, and
precious stones there was not a sign. But before the Prince had time
to feel despondent the black girl beckoned to him in the distance from
behind a rock, where she had hidden herself for fear her mother should
catch sight of her. Full of joy the youth hurried towards her, and
begged her aid and counsel in the new piece of work he had been given to
do.

But this time the Fairy had watched the Prince’s movements from
her window, and she saw him hiding himself behind the rock with her
daughter. She uttered a piercing shriek so that the mountains re-echoed
with the sound of it, and the terrified pair had hardly dared to look
out from their hiding-place when the enraged woman, with her dress and
hair flying in the wind, hurried over the bridge of clouds. The Prince
at once gave himself up for lost, but the girl told him to be of good
courage and to follow her as quickly as he could. But before they left
their shelter she broke off a little bit of the rock, spoke some magic
words over it, and threw it in the direction her mother was coming from.
In a moment a glittering palace arose before the eyes of the Fairy which
blinded her with its dazzling splendour, and with its many doors and
passages prevented her for some time from finding her way out of it.

In the meantime the black girl hurried on with the Prince, hastening to
reach the river, where once on the other side they would for ever be out
of the wicked Fairy’s power. But before they had accomplished half the
way they heard again the rustle of her garments and her muttered curses
pursuing them closely.

The Prince was terrified; he dared not look back, and he felt his
strength giving way. But before he had time to despair the girl uttered
some more magic words, and immediately she herself was changed into a
pond, and the Prince into a duck swimming on its surface.

When the Fairy saw this her rage knew no bounds, and she used all her
magic wits to make the pond disappear; she caused a hill of sand to
arise at her feet, meaning it to dry up the water at once. But the sand
hill only drove the pond a little farther away, and its waters seemed to
increase instead of diminishing. When the old woman saw that the powers
of her magic were of so little avail, she had recourse to cunning. She
threw a lot of gold nuts into the pond, hoping in this way to catch
the duck, but all her efforts were fruitless, for the little creature
refused to let itself be caught.

Then a new idea struck the wicked old woman, and hiding herself behind
the rock which had sheltered the fugitives, she waited behind it,
watching carefully for the moment when the Prince and her daughter
should resume their natural forms and continue their journey.

She had not to wait long, for as soon as the girl thought her mother was
safely out of the way, she changed herself and the Prince once more into
their human shape, and set out cheerfully for the river.

But they had not gone many steps when the wicked Fairy hurried after
them, a drawn dagger in her hand, and was close upon them, when
suddenly, instead of the Prince and her daughter, she found herself in
front of a great stone church, whose entrance was carefully guarded by a
huge monk.

Breathless with rage and passion, she tried to plunge her dagger into
the monk’s heart, but it fell shattered in pieces at her feet. In her
desperation she determined to pull down the church, and thus to destroy
her two victims for ever. She stamped three times on the ground, and the
earth trembled, and both the church and the monk began to shake. As soon
as the Fairy saw this she retreated to some distance from the building,
so as not to be hurt herself by its fall. But once more her scheme was
doomed to failure, for hardly had she gone a yard from the church than
both it and the monk disappeared, and she found herself in a wood black
as night, and full of wolves and bears and wild animals of all sorts and
descriptions.

Then her wrath gave place to terror, for she feared every moment to be
torn in pieces by the beasts who one and all seemed to defy her power.
She thought it wisest to make her way as best she could out of the
forest, and then to pursue the fugitives once more and accomplish their
destruction either by force or cunning.

In the meantime the Prince and the black girl had again assumed their
natural forms, and were hurrying on as fast as they could to reach the
river. But when they got there they found that there was no way in which
they could cross it, and the girl’s magic art seemed no longer to
have any power. Then turning to the Prince she said, ‘The hour for my
deliverance has not yet come, but as you promised to do all you could to
free me, you must do exactly as I bid you now. Take this bow and arrow
and kill every beast you see with them, and be sure you spare no living
creature.’

With these words she disappeared, and hardly had she done so than a
huge wild boar started out of the thicket near and made straight for the
Prince. But the youth did not lose his presence of mind, and drawing
his bow he pierced the beast with his arrow right through the skull. The
creature fell heavily on the ground, and out of its side sprang a little
hare, which ran like the wind along the river bank. The Prince drew his
bow once more, and the hare lay dead at his feet; but at the same moment
a dove rose up in the air, and circled round the Prince’s head in the
most confiding manner. But mindful of the black girl’s commands, he
dared not spare the little creature’s life, and taking another arrow
from his quiver he laid it as dead as the boar and the hare. But when
he went to look at the body of the bird he found instead of the dove a
round white egg lying on the ground.

While he was gazing on it and wondering what it could mean, he heard the
sweeping of wings above him, and looking up he saw a huge vulture with
open claws swooping down upon him. In a moment he seized the egg and
flung it at the bird with all his might, and lo and behold! instead of
the ugly monster the most beautiful girl he had ever seen stood before
the astonished eyes of the Prince.

But while all this was going on the wicked old Fairy had managed to
make her way out of the wood, and was now using the last resource in her
power to overtake her daughter and the Prince. As soon as she was in the
open again she mounted her chariot, which was drawn by a fiery dragon,
and flew through the air in it. But just as she got to the river she saw
the two lovers in each other’s arms swimming through the water as easily
as two fishes.

Quick as lightning, and forgetful of every danger, she flew down upon
them. But the waters seized her chariot and sunk it in the lowest
depths, and the waves bore the wicked old woman down the stream till she
was caught in some thorn bushes, where she made a good meal for all the
little fishes that were swimming about.

And so at last the Prince and his lovely Bride were free. They hurried
as quickly as they could to the old King, who received them with joy and
gladness. On the following day a most gorgeous wedding feast was held,
and as far as we know the Prince and his bride lived happily for ever
afterwards.




THE DEAD WIFE(20)

(20) From the Iroquois.

Once upon a time there were a man and his wife who lived in the forest,
very far from the rest of the tribe. Very often they spent the day in
hunting together, but after a while the wife found that she had so many
things to do that she was obliged to stay at home; so he went alone,
though he found that when his wife was not with him he never had any
luck. One day, when he was away hunting, the woman fell ill, and in a
few days she died.

Her husband grieved bitterly, and buried her in the house where she had
passed her life; but as the time went on he felt so lonely without her
that he made a wooden doll about her height and size for company, and
dressed it in her clothes. He seated it in front of the fire, and tried
to think he had his wife back again. The next day he went out to hunt,
and when he came home the first thing he did was to go up to the doll
and brush off some of the ashes from the fire which had fallen on its
face. But he was very busy now, for he had to cook and mend, besides
getting food, for there was no one to help him. And so a whole year
passed away.

At the end of that time he came back from hunting one night and found
some wood by the door and a fire within. The next night there was not
only wood and fire, but a piece of meat in the kettle, nearly ready for
eating. He searched all about to see who could have done this, but could
find no one. The next time he went to hunt he took care not to go far,
and came in quite early. And while he was still a long way off he saw a
woman going into the house with wood on her shoulders. So he made haste,
and opened the door quickly, and instead of the wooden doll, his wife
sat in front of the fire.

Then she spoke to him and said, ‘The Great Spirit felt sorry for you,
because you would not be comforted, so he let me come back to you, but
you must not stretch out your hand to touch me till we have seen the
rest of our people. If you do, I shall die.’

So the man listened to her words, and the woman dwelt there, and brought
the wood and kindled the fire, till one day her husband said to her, ‘It
is now two years since you died. Let us now go back to our tribe. Then
you will be well, and I can touch you.’

And with that he prepared food for the journey, a string of deer’s flesh
for her to carry, and one for himself; and so they started. Now the camp
of the tribe was distant six days’ journey, and when they were yet one
day’s journey off it began to snow, and they felt weary and longed for
rest. Therefore they made a fire, cooked some food, and spread out their
skins to sleep.

Then the heart of the man was greatly stirred, and he stretched out his
arms to his wife, but she waved her hands and said, ‘We have seen no one
yet; it is too soon.’

But he would not listen to her, and caught her to him, and behold! he
was clasping the wooden doll. And when he saw it was the doll he pushed
it from him in his misery and rushed away to the camp, and told them all
his story. And some doubted, and they went back with him to the place
where he and his wife had stopped to rest, and there lay the doll, and
besides, they saw in the snow the steps of two people, and the foot of
one was like the foot of the doll. And the man grieved sore all the days
of his life.




IN THE LAND OF SOULS (21)

(21) From the Red Indian.

Far away, in North America, where the Red Indians dwell, there lived a
long time ago a beautiful maiden, who was lovelier than any other girl
in the whole tribe. Many of the young braves sought her in marriage, but
she would listen to one only--a handsome chief, who had taken her fancy
some years before. So they were to be married, and great rejoicings were
made, and the two looked forward to a long life of happiness together,
when the very night before the wedding feast a sudden illness seized the
girl, and, without a word to her friends who were weeping round her, she
passed silently away.

The heart of her lover had been set upon her, and the thought of her
remained with him night and day. He put aside his bow, and went neither
to fight nor to hunt, but from sunrise to sunset he sat by the place
where she was laid, thinking of his happiness that was buried there.
At last, after many days, a light seemed to come to him out of the
darkness. He remembered having heard from the old, old people of the
tribe, that there was a path that led to the Land of Souls--that if you
sought carefully you could find it.

So the next morning he got up early, and put some food in his pouch and
slung an extra skin over his shoulders, for he knew not how long
his journey would take, nor what sort of country he would have to go
through. Only one thing he knew, that if the path was there, he would
find it. At first he was puzzled, as there seemed no reason he should go
in one direction more than another. Then all at once he thought he had
heard one of the old men say that the Land of Souls lay to the south,
and so, filled with new hope and courage, he set his face southwards.
For many, many miles the country looked the same as it did round his own
home. The forests, the hills, and the rivers all seemed exactly like the
ones he had left. The only thing that was different was the snow, which
had lain thick upon the hills and trees when he started, but grew less
and less the farther he went south, till it disappeared altogether. Soon
the trees put forth their buds, and flowers sprang up under his feet,
and instead of thick clouds there was blue sky over his head, and
everywhere the birds were singing. Then he knew that he was in the right
road.

The thought that he should soon behold his lost bride made his heart
beat for joy, and he sped along lightly and swiftly. Now his way led
through a dark wood, and then over some steep cliffs, and on the top of
these he found a hut or wigwam. An old man clothed in skins, and holding
a staff in his hand, stood in the doorway; and he said to the young
chief who was beginning to tell his story, ‘I was waiting for you,
wherefore you have come I know. It is but a short while since she whom
you seek was here. Rest in my hut, as she also rested, and I will tell
you what you ask, and whither you should go.’

On hearing these words, the young man entered the hut, but his heart was
too eager within him to suffer him to rest, and when he arose, the old
man rose too, and stood with him at the door. ‘Look,’ he said, ‘at the
water which lies far out yonder, and the plains which stretch beyond.
That is the Land of Souls, but no man enters it without leaving his body
behind him. So, lay down your body here; your bow and arrows, your skin
and your dog. They shall be kept for you safely.’

Then he turned away, and the young chief, light as air, seemed hardly to
touch the ground; and as he flew along the scents grew sweeter and the
flowers more beautiful, while the animals rubbed their noses against
him, instead of hiding as he approached, and birds circled round him,
and fishes lifted up their heads and looked as he went by. Very soon he
noticed with wonder, that neither rocks nor trees barred his path. He
passed through them without knowing it, for indeed, they were not rocks
and trees at all, but only the souls of them; for this was the Land of
Shadows.

So he went on with winged feet till he came to the shores of a great
lake, with a lovely island in the middle of it; while on the bank of the
lake was a canoe of glittering stone, and in the canoe were two shining
paddles.

The chief jumped straight into the canoe, and seizing the paddles pushed
off from the shore, when to his joy and wonder he saw following him in
another canoe exactly like his own the maiden for whose sake he had made
this long journey. But they could not touch each other, for between them
rolled great waves, which looked as if they would sink the boats, yet
never did. And the young man and the maiden shrank with fear, for down
in the depths of the water they saw the bones of those who had died
before, and in the waves themselves men and women were struggling, and
but few passed over. Only the children had no fear, and reached the
other side in safety. Still, though the chief and the young girl quailed
in terror at these horrible sights and sounds, no harm came to them,
for their lives had been free from evil, and the Master of Life had said
that no evil should happen unto them. So they reached unhurt the shore
of the Happy Island, and wandered through the flowery fields and by the
banks of rushing streams, and they knew not hunger nor thirst; neither
cold nor heat. The air fed them and the sun warmed them, and they forgot
the dead, for they saw no graves, and the young man’s thoughts turned
not to wars, neither to the hunting of animals. And gladly would these
two have walked thus for ever, but in the murmur of the wind he heard
the Master of Life saying to him, ‘Return whither you came, for I have
work for you to do, and your people need you, and for many years you
shall rule over them. At the gate my messenger awaits you, and you shall
take again your body which you left behind, and he will show you what
you are to do. Listen to him, and have patience, and in time to come you
shall rejoin her whom you must now leave, for she is accepted, and will
remain ever young and beautiful, as when I called her hence from the
Land of Snows.’




THE WHITE DUCK

Once upon a time a great and powerful King married a lovely Princess. No
couple were ever so happy; but before their honeymoon was over they were
forced to part, for the King had to go on a warlike expedition to a far
country, and leave his young wife alone at home. Bitter were the tears
she shed, while her husband sought in vain to soothe her with words of
comfort and counsel, warning her, above all things, never to leave
the castle, to hold no intercourse with strangers, to beware of evil
counsellors, and especially to be on her guard against strange women.
And the Queen promised faithfully to obey her royal lord and master in
these four matters.

So when the King set out on his expedition she shut herself up with
her ladies in her own apartments, and spent her time in spinning and
weaving, and in thinking of her royal husband. Often she was very sad
and lonely, and it happened that one day while she was seated at the
window, letting salt tears drop on her work, an old woman, a kind,
homely-looking old body, stepped up to the window, and, leaning upon her
crutch, addressed the Queen in friendly, flattering tones, saying:

‘Why are you sad and cast down, fair Queen? You should not mope all day
in your rooms, but should come out into the green garden, and hear the
birds sing with joy among the trees, and see the butterflies fluttering
above the flowers, and hear the bees and insects hum, and watch
the sunbeams chase the dew-drops through the rose-leaves and in the
lily-cups. All the brightness outside would help to drive away your
cares, O Queen.’

For long the Queen resisted her coaxing words, remembering the promise
she had given the King, her husband; but at last she thought to herself:
After all, what harm would it do if I were to go into the garden for a
short time and enjoy myself among the trees and flowers, and the singing
birds and fluttering butterflies and humming insects, and look at
the dew-drops hiding from the sunbeams in the hearts of the roses and
lilies, and wander about in the sunshine, instead of remaining all
day in this room? For she had no idea that the kind-looking old woman
leaning on her crutch was in reality a wicked witch, who envied the
Queen her good fortune, and was determined to ruin her. And so, in all
ignorance, the Queen followed her out into the garden and listened to
her smooth, flattering words. Now, in the middle of the garden there was
a pond of water, clear as crystal, and the old woman said to the Queen:

‘The day is so warm, and the sun’s rays so scorching, that the water in
the pond looks very cool and inviting. Would you not like to bathe in
it, fair Queen?’

‘No, I think not,’ answered the Queen; but the next moment she regretted
her words, and thought to herself: Why shouldn’t I bathe in that cool,
fresh water? No harm could come of it. And, so saying, she slipped off
her robes and stepped into the water. But scarcely had her tender feet
touched the cool ripples when she felt a great shove on her shoulders,
and the wicked witch had pushed her into the deep water, exclaiming:

‘Swim henceforth, White Duck!’

And the witch herself assumed the form of the Queen, and decked herself
out in the royal robes, and sat among the Court ladies, awaiting the
King’s return. And suddenly the tramp of horses’ hoofs was heard, and
the barking of dogs, and the witch hastened forward to meet the royal
carriages, and, throwing her arms round the King’s neck, kissed him.
And in his great joy the King did not know that the woman he held in his
arms was not his own dear wife, but a wicked witch.

In the meantime, outside the palace walls, the poor White Duck swam up
and down the pond; and near it laid three eggs, out of which there came
one morning two little fluffy ducklings and a little ugly drake. And the
White Duck brought the little creatures up, and they paddled after her
in the pond, and caught gold-fish, and hopped upon the bank and waddled
about, ruffling their feathers and saying ‘Quack, quack’ as they
strutted about on the green banks of the pond. But their mother used to
warn them not to stray too far, telling them that a wicked witch lived
in the castle beyond the garden, adding, ‘She has ruined me, and she
will do her best to ruin you.’ But the young ones did not listen to
their mother, and, playing about the garden one day, they strayed close
up to the castle windows. The witch at once recognised them by their
smell, and ground her teeth with anger; but she hid her feelings, and,
pretending to be very kind she called them to her and joked with them,
and led them into a beautiful room, where she gave them food to eat, and
showed them a soft cushion on which they might sleep. Then she left them
and went down into the palace kitchens, where she told the servants to
sharpen the knives, and to make a great fire ready, and hang a large
kettleful of water over it.

In the meantime the two little ducklings had fallen asleep, and the
little drake lay between them, covered up by their wings, to be kept
warm under their feathers. But the little drake could not go to sleep,
and as he lay there wide awake in the night he heard the witch come to
the door and say:

‘Little ones, are you asleep?’

And the little drake answered for the other two:

          ‘We cannot sleep, we wake and weep,
           Sharp is the knife, to take our life;
           The fire is hot, now boils the pot,
           And so we wake, and lie and quake.’

‘They are not asleep yet,’ muttered the witch to herself; and she walked
up and down in the passage, and then came back to the door, and said:

‘Little ones, are you asleep?’

And again the little drake answered for his sisters:

          ‘We cannot sleep, we wake and weep,
           Sharp is the knife, to take our life;
           The fire is hot, now boils the pot,
           And so we wake, and lie and quake.’

‘Just the same answer,’ muttered the witch; ‘I think I’ll go in and
see.’ So she opened the door gently, and seeing the two little ducklings
sound asleep, she there and then killed them.

The next morning the White Duck wandered round the pond in a distracted
manner, looking for her little ones; she called and she searched, but
could find no trace of them. And in her heart she had a foreboding that
evil had befallen them, and she fluttered up out of the water and flew
to the palace. And there, laid out on the marble floor of the court,
dead and stone cold, were her three children. The White Duck threw
herself upon them, and, covering up their little bodies with her wings,
she cried:

          ‘Quack, quack--my little loves!
           Quack, quack--my turtle-doves!
            I brought you up with grief and pain,
           And now before my eyes you’re slain.

           I gave you always of the best;
           I kept you warm in my soft nest.
            I loved and watched you day and night--
           You were my joy, my one delight.’


The King heard the sad complaint of the White Duck, and called to the
witch: ‘Wife, what a wonder is this? Listen to that White Duck.’

But the witch answered, ‘My dear husband, what do you mean? There is
nothing wonderful in a duck’s quacking. Here, servants! Chase that duck
out of the courtyard.’ But though the servants chased and chevied, they
could not get rid of the duck; for she circled round and round, and
always came back to the spot where her children lay, crying:

          ‘Quack, quack--my little loves!
           Quack, quack--my turtle-doves!
            The wicked witch your lives did take--
           The wicked witch, the cunning snake.
            First she stole my King away,
           Then my children did she slay.
            Changed me, from a happy wife,
           To a duck for all my life.
            Would I were the Queen again;
           Would that you had never been slain.’

And as the King heard her words he began to suspect that he had been
deceived, and he called out to the servants, ‘Catch that duck, and bring
it here.’ But, though they ran to and fro, the duck always fled past
them, and would not let herself be caught. So the King himself stepped
down amongst them, and instantly the duck fluttered down into his hands.
And as he stroked her wings she was changed into a beautiful woman, and
he recognised his dear wife. And she told him that a bottle would be
found in her nest in the garden, containing some drops from the spring
of healing. And it was brought to her; and the ducklings and little
drake were sprinkled with the water, and from the little dead bodies
three lovely children arose. And the King and Queen were overjoyed when
they saw their children, and they all lived happily together in the
beautiful palace. But the wicked witch was taken by the King’s command,
and she came to no good end.




THE WITCH AND HER SERVANTS(22)

(22) From the Russian. Kletke.

Long time ago there lived a King who had three sons; the eldest was
called Szabo, the second Warza, and the youngest Iwanich.

One beautiful spring morning the King was walking through his
gardens with these three sons, gazing with admiration at the various
fruit-trees, some of which were a mass of blossom, whilst others were
bowed to the ground laden with rich fruit. During their wanderings they
came unperceived on a piece of waste land where three splendid trees
grew. The King looked on them for a moment, and then, shaking his head
sadly, he passed on in silence.

The sons, who could not understand why he did this, asked him the reason
of his dejection, and the King told them as follows:

‘These three trees, which I cannot see without sorrow, were planted by
me on this spot when I was a youth of twenty. A celebrated magician, who
had given the seed to my father, promised him that they would grow into
the three finest trees the world had ever seen. My father did not live
to see his words come true; but on his death-bed he bade me transplant
them here, and to look after them with the greatest care, which I
accordingly did. At last, after the lapse of five long years, I noticed
some blossoms on the branches, and a few days later the most exquisite
fruit my eyes had ever seen.

‘I gave my head-gardener the strictest orders to watch the trees
carefully, for the magician had warned my father that if one unripe
fruit were plucked from the tree, all the rest would become rotten at
once. When it was quite ripe the fruit would become a golden yellow.

‘Every day I gazed on the lovely fruit, which became gradually more
and more tempting-looking, and it was all I could do not to break the
magician’s commands.

‘One night I dreamt that the fruit was perfectly ripe; I ate some of it,
and it was more delicious than anything I had ever tasted in real life.
As soon as I awoke I sent for the gardener and asked him if the fruit on
the three trees had not ripened in the night to perfection.

‘But instead of replying, the gardener threw himself at my feet and
swore that he was innocent. He said that he had watched by the trees all
night, but in spite of it, and as if by magic, the beautiful trees had
been robbed of all their fruit.

‘Grieved as I was over the theft, I did not punish the gardener, of
whose fidelity I was well assured, but I determined to pluck off all the
fruit in the following year before it was ripe, as I had not much belief
in the magician’s warning.

‘I carried out my intention, and had all the fruit picked off the tree,
but when I tasted one of the apples it was bitter and unpleasant, and
the next morning the rest of the fruit had all rotted away.

‘After this I had the beautiful fruit of these trees carefully guarded
by my most faithful servants; but every year, on this very night, the
fruit was plucked and stolen by an invisible hand, and next morning not
a single apple remained on the trees. For some time past I have given up
even having the trees watched.’

When the King had finished his story, Szabo, his eldest son, said to
him: ‘Forgive me, father, if I say I think you are mistaken. I am sure
there are many men in your kingdom who could protect these trees from
the cunning arts of a thieving magician; I myself, who as your eldest
son claim the first right to do so, will mount guard over the fruit this
very night.’

The King consented, and as soon as evening drew on Szabo climbed up on
to one of the trees, determined to protect the fruit even if it cost him
his life. So he kept watch half the night; but a little after midnight
he was overcome by an irresistible drowsiness, and fell fast asleep.
He did not awake till it was bright daylight, and all the fruit on the
trees had vanished.

The following year Warza, the second brother, tried his luck, but with
the same result. Then it came to the turn of the third and youngest son.

Iwanich was not the least discouraged by the failure of his elder
brothers, though they were both much older and stronger than he was,
and when night came climbed up the tree as they had done, The moon had
risen, and with her soft light lit up the whole neighbourhood, so that
the observant Prince could distinguish the smallest object distinctly.

At midnight a gentle west wind shook the tree, and at the same moment
a snow-white swan-like bird sank down gently on his breast. The
Prince hastily seized the bird’s wings in his hands, when, lo! to his
astonishment he found he was holding in his arms not a bird but the most
beautiful girl he had ever seen.

‘You need not fear Militza,’ said the beautiful girl, looking at the
Prince with friendly eyes. ‘An evil magician has not robbed you of your
fruit, but he stole the seed from my mother, and thereby caused her
death. When she was dying she bade me take the fruit, which you have no
right to possess, from the trees every year as soon as it was ripe.
This I would have done to-night too, if you had not seized me with such
force, and so broken the spell I was under.’

Iwanich, who had been prepared to meet a terrible magician and not a
lovely girl, fell desperately in love with her. They spent the rest of
the night in pleasant conversation, and when Militza wished to go away
he begged her not to leave him.

‘I would gladly stay with you longer,’ said Militza, ‘but a wicked witch
once cut off a lock of my hair when I was asleep, which has put me in
her power, and if morning were still to find me here she would do me
some harm, and you, too, perhaps.’

Having said these words, she drew a sparkling diamond ring from her
finger, which she handed to the Prince, saying: ‘Keep this ring in
memory of Militza, and think of her sometimes if you never see her
again. But if your love is really true, come and find me in my own
kingdom. I may not show you the way there, but this ring will guide you.

‘If you have love and courage enough to undertake this journey, whenever
you come to a cross-road always look at this diamond before you settle
which way you are going to take. If it sparkles as brightly as ever go
straight on, but if its lustre is dimmed choose another path.’

Then Militza bent over the Prince and kissed him on his forehead, and
before he had time to say a word she vanished through the branches of
the tree in a little white cloud.

Morning broke, and the Prince, still full of the wonderful apparition,
left his perch and returned to the palace like one in a dream, without
even knowing if the fruit had been taken or not; for his whole mind was
absorbed by thoughts of Militza and how he was to find her.

As soon as the head-gardener saw the Prince going towards the palace he
ran to the trees, and when he saw them laden with ripe fruit he hastened
to tell the King the joyful news. The King was beside himself for joy,
and hurried at once to the garden and made the gardener pick him some of
the fruit. He tasted it, and found the apple quite as luscious as it
had been in his dream. He went at once to his son Iwanich, and after
embracing him tenderly and heaping praises on him, he asked him how
he had succeeded in protecting the costly fruit from the power of the
magician.

This question placed Iwanich in a dilemma. But as he did not want the
real story to be known, he said that about midnight a huge wasp had
flown through the branches, and buzzed incessantly round him. He had
warded it off with his sword, and at dawn, when he was becoming quite
worn out, the wasp had vanished as suddenly as it had appeared.

The King, who never doubted the truth of this tale, bade his son go to
rest at once and recover from the fatigues of the night; but he himself
went and ordered many feasts to be held in honour of the preservation of
the wonderful fruit.

The whole capital was in a stir, and everyone shared in the King’s joy;
the Prince alone took no part in the festivities.

While the King was at a banquet, Iwanich took some purses of gold, and
mounting the quickest horse in the royal stable, he sped off like the
wind without a single soul being any the wiser.

It was only on the next day that they missed him; the King was very
distressed at his disappearance, and sent search-parties all over the
kingdom to look for him, but in vain; and after six months they gave him
up as dead, and in another six months they had forgotten all about him.
But in the meantime the Prince, with the help of his ring, had had a
most successful journey, and no evil had befallen him.

At the end of three months he came to the entrance of a huge forest,
which looked as if it had never been trodden by human foot before, and
which seemed to stretch out indefinitely. The Prince was about to enter
the wood by a little path he had discovered, when he heard a voice
shouting to him: ‘Hold, youth! Whither are you going?’

Iwanich turned round, and saw a tall, gaunt-looking man, clad in
miserable rags, leaning on a crooked staff and seated at the foot of
an oak tree, which was so much the same colour as himself that it was
little wonder the Prince had ridden past the tree without noticing him.

‘Where else should I be going,’ he said, ‘than through the wood?’

‘Through the wood?’ said the old man in amazement. ‘It’s easily seen
that you have heard nothing of this forest, that you rush so blindly to
meet your doom. Well, listen to me before you ride any further; let me
tell you that this wood hides in its depths a countless number of the
fiercest tigers, hyenas, wolves, bears, and snakes, and all sorts of
other monsters. If I were to cut you and your horse up into tiny morsels
and throw them to the beasts, there wouldn’t be one bit for each hundred
of them. Take my advice, therefore, and if you wish to save your life
follow some other path.’

The Prince was rather taken aback by the old man’s words, and considered
for a minute what he should do; then looking at his ring, and perceiving
that it sparkled as brightly as ever, he called out: ‘If this wood held
even more terrible things than it does, I cannot help myself, for I must
go through it.’

Here he spurred his horse and rode on; but the old beggar screamed so
loudly after him that the Prince turned round and rode back to the oak
tree.

‘I am really sorry for you,’ said the beggar, ‘but if you are quite
determined to brave the dangers of the forest, let me at least give you
a piece of advice which will help you against these monsters.

‘Take this bagful of bread-crumbs and this live hare. I will make you
a present of them both, as I am anxious to save your life; but you must
leave your horse behind you, for it would stumble over the fallen trees
or get entangled in the briers and thorns. When you have gone about a
hundred yards into the wood the wild beasts will surround you. Then you
must instantly seize your bag, and scatter the bread-crumbs among them.
They will rush to eat them up greedily, and when you have scattered the
last crumb you must lose no time in throwing the hare to them; as soon
as the hare feels itself on the ground it will run away as quickly as
possible, and the wild beasts will turn to pursue it. In this way you
will be able to get through the wood unhurt.’

Iwanich thanked the old man for his counsel, dismounted from his horse,
and, taking the bag and the hare in his arms, he entered the forest. He
had hardly lost sight of his gaunt grey friend when he heard growls and
snarls in the thicket close to him, and before he had time to think he
found himself surrounded by the most dreadful-looking creatures. On
one side he saw the glittering eye of a cruel tiger, on the other the
gleaming teeth of a great she-wolf; here a huge bear growled fiercely,
and there a horrible snake coiled itself in the grass at his feet.

But Iwanich did not forget the old man’s advice, and quickly put his
hand into the bag and took out as many bread-crumbs as he could hold in
his hand at a time. He threw them to the beasts, but soon the bag grew
lighter and lighter, and the Prince began to feel a little frightened.
And now the last crumb was gone, and the hungry beasts thronged round
him, greedy for fresh prey. Then he seized the hare and threw it to
them.

No sooner did the little creature feel itself on the ground than it
lay back its ears and flew through the wood like an arrow from a bow,
closely pursued by the wild beasts, and the Prince was left alone. He
looked at his ring, and when he saw that it sparkled as brightly as ever
he went straight on through the forest.

He hadn’t gone very far when he saw a most extraordinary looking man
coming towards him. He was not more than three feet high, his legs
were quite crooked, and all his body was covered with prickles like a
hedgehog. Two lions walked with him, fastened to his side by the two
ends of his long beard.

He stopped the Prince and asked him in a harsh voice: ‘Are you the man
who has just fed my body-guard?’

Iwanich was so startled that he could hardly reply, but the little man
continued: ‘I am most grateful to you for your kindness; what can I give
you as a reward?’

‘All I ask,’ replied Iwanich, ‘is, that I should be allowed to go
through this wood in safety.’

‘Most certainly,’ answered the little man; ‘and for greater security I
will give you one of my lions as a protector. But when you leave this
wood and come near a palace which does not belong to my domain, let the
lion go, in order that he may not fall into the hands of an enemy and be
killed.’

With these words he loosened the lion from his beard and bade the beast
guard the youth carefully.

With this new protector Iwanich wandered on through the forest, and
though he came upon a great many more wolves, hyenas, leopards, and
other wild beasts, they always kept at a respectful distance when they
saw what sort of an escort the Prince had with him.

Iwanich hurried through the wood as quickly as his legs would carry him,
but, nevertheless, hour after hour went by and not a trace of a green
field or a human habitation met his eyes. At length, towards evening,
the mass of trees grew more transparent, and through the interlaced
branches a wide plain was visible.

At the exit of the wood the lion stood still, and the Prince took leave
of him, having first thanked him warmly for his kind protection. It had
become quite dark, and Iwanich was forced to wait for daylight before
continuing his journey.

He made himself a bed of grass and leaves, lit a fire of dry branches,
and slept soundly till the next morning.

Then he got up and walked towards a beautiful white palace which he saw
gleaming in the distance. In about an hour he reached the building, and
opening the door he walked in.

After wandering through many marble halls, he came to a huge staircase
made of porphyry, leading down to a lovely garden.

The Prince burst into a shout of joy when he suddenly perceived Militza
in the centre of a group of girls who were weaving wreaths of flowers
with which to deck their mistress.

As soon as Militza saw the Prince she ran up to him and embraced him
tenderly; and after he had told her all his adventures, they went into
the palace, where a sumptuous meal awaited them. Then the Princess
called her court together, and introduced Iwanich to them as her future
husband.

Preparations were at once made for the wedding, which was held soon
after with great pomp and magnificence.

Three months of great happiness followed, when Militza received one day
an invitation to visit her mother’s sister.

Although the Princess was very unhappy at leaving her husband, she did
not like to refuse the invitation, and, promising to return in seven
days at the latest, she took a tender farewell of the Prince, and
said: ‘Before I go I will hand you over all the keys of the castle. Go
everywhere and do anything you like; only one thing I beg and beseech
you, do not open the little iron door in the north tower, which is
closed with seven locks and seven bolts; for if you do, we shall both
suffer for it.’

Iwanich promised what she asked, and Militza departed, repeating her
promise to return in seven days.

When the Prince found himself alone he began to be tormented by pangs
of curiosity as to what the room in the tower contained. For two days he
resisted the temptation to go and look, but on the third he could stand
it no longer, and taking a torch in his hand he hurried to the tower,
and unfastened one lock after the other of the little iron door until it
burst open.

What an unexpected sight met his gaze! The Prince perceived a small room
black with smoke, lit up feebly by a fire from which issued long blue
flames. Over the fire hung a huge cauldron full of boiling pitch, and
fastened into the cauldron by iron chains stood a wretched man screaming
with agony.

Iwanich was much horrified at the sight before him, and asked the man
what terrible crime he had committed to be punished in this dreadful
fashion.

‘I will tell you everything,’ said the man in the cauldron; ‘but first
relieve my torments a little, I implore you.’

‘And how can I do that?’ asked the Prince.

‘With a little water,’ replied the man; ‘only sprinkle a few drops over
me and I shall feel better.’

The Prince, moved by pity, without thinking what he was doing, ran
to the courtyard of the castle, and filled a jug with water, which he
poured over the man in the cauldron.

In a moment a most fearful crash was heard, as if all the pillars of the
palace were giving way, and the palace itself, with towers and doors,
windows and the cauldron, whirled round the bewildered Prince’s head.
This continued for a few minutes, and then everything vanished into
thin air, and Iwanich found himself suddenly alone upon a desolate heath
covered with rocks and stones.

The Prince, who now realised what his heedlessness had done, cursed too
late his spirit of curiosity. In his despair he wandered on over the
heath, never looking where he put his feet, and full of sorrowful
thoughts. At last he saw a light in the distance, which came from a
miserable-looking little hut.

The owner of it was none other than the kind-hearted gaunt grey beggar
who had given the Prince the bag of bread-crumbs and the hare. Without
recognising Iwanich, he opened the door when he knocked and gave him
shelter for the night.

On the following morning the Prince asked his host if he could get him
any work to do, as he was quite unknown in the neighbourhood, and had
not enough money to take him home.

‘My son,’ replied the old man, ‘all this country round here is
uninhabited; I myself have to wander to distant villages for my living,
and even then I do not very often find enough to satisfy my hunger. But
if you would like to take service with the old witch Corva, go straight
up the little stream which flows below my hut for about three hours, and
you will come to a sand-hill on the left-hand side; that is where she
lives.’

Iwanich thanked the gaunt grey beggar for his information, and went on
his way.

After walking for about three hours the Prince came upon a
dreary-looking grey stone wall; this was the back of the building and
did not attract him; but when he came upon the front of the house
he found it even less inviting, for the old witch had surrounded her
dwelling with a fence of spikes, on every one of which a man’s skull was
stuck. In this horrible enclosure stood a small black house, which had
only two grated windows, all covered with cobwebs, and a battered iron
door.

The Prince knocked, and a rasping woman’s voice told him to enter.

Iwanich opened the door, and found himself in a smoke-begrimed kitchen,
in the presence of a hideous old woman who was warming her skinny hands
at a fire. The Prince offered to become her servant, and the old hag
told him she was badly in want of one, and he seemed to be just the
person to suit her.

When Iwanich asked what his work, and how much his wages would be, the
witch bade him follow her, and led the way through a narrow damp
passage into a vault, which served as a stable. Here he perceived two
pitch-black horses in a stall.

‘You see before you,’ said the old woman, ‘a mare and her foal; you have
nothing to do but to lead them out to the fields every day, and to see
that neither of them runs away from you. If you look after them both for
a whole year I will give you anything you like to ask; but if, on the
other hand, you let either of the animals escape you, your last hour is
come, and your head shall be stuck on the last spike of my fence. The
other spikes, as you see, are already adorned, and the skulls are all
those of different servants I have had who have failed to do what I
demanded.’

Iwanich, who thought he could not be much worse off than he was already,
agreed to the witch’s proposal.

At daybreak nest morning he drove his horses to the field, and brought
them back in the evening without their ever having attempted to break
away from him. The witch stood at her door and received him kindly, and
set a good meal before him.

So it continued for some time, and all went well with the Prince.

Early every morning he led the horses out to the fields, and brought
them home safe and sound in the evening.

One day, while he was watching the horses, he came to the banks of a
river, and saw a big fish, which through some mischance had been cast on
the land, struggling hard to get back into the water.

Iwanich, who felt sorry for the poor creature, seized it in his arms and
flung it into the stream. But no sooner did the fish find itself in the
water again, than, to the Prince’s amazement, it swam up to the bank and
said:

‘My kind benefactor, how can I reward you for your goodness?’

‘I desire nothing,’ answered the Prince. ‘I am quite content to have
been able to be of some service to you.’

‘You must do me the favour,’ replied the fish, ‘to take a scale from my
body, and keep it carefully. If you should ever need my help, throw it
into the river, and I will come to your aid at once.’

Iwanich bowed, loosened a scale from the body of the grateful beast, put
it carefully away, and returned home.

A short time after this, when he was going early one morning to the
usual grazing place with his horses, he noticed a flock of birds
assembled together making a great noise and flying wildly backwards and
forwards.

Full of curiosity, Iwanich hurried up to the spot, and saw that a large
number of ravens had attacked an eagle, and although the eagle was big
and powerful and was making a brave fight, it was overpowered at last by
numbers, and had to give in.

But the Prince, who was sorry for the poor bird, seized the branch of
a tree and hit out at the ravens with it; terrified at this unexpected
onslaught they flew away, leaving many of their number dead or wounded
on the battlefield.

As soon as the eagle saw itself free from its tormentors it plucked a
feather from its wing, and, handing it to the Prince, said: ‘Here, my
kind benefactor, take this feather as a proof of my gratitude; should
you ever be in need of my help blow this feather into the air, and I
will help you as much as is in my power.’

Iwanich thanked the bird, and placing the feather beside the scale he
drove the horses home.

Another day he had wandered farther than usual, and came close to a
farmyard; the place pleased the Prince, and as there was plenty of good
grass for the horses he determined to spend the day there. Just as he
was sitting down under a tree he heard a cry close to him, and saw a fox
which had been caught in a trap placed there by the farmer.

In vain did the poor beast try to free itself; then the good-natured
Prince came once more to the rescue, and let the fox out of the trap.

The fox thanked him heartily, tore two hairs out of his bushy tail, and
said: ‘Should you ever stand in need of my help throw these two hairs
into the fire, and in a moment I shall be at your side ready to obey
you.’

Iwanich put the fox’s hairs with the scale and the feather, and as it
was getting dark he hastened home with his horses.

In the meantime his service was drawing near to an end, and in three
more days the year was up, and he would be able to get his reward and
leave the witch.

On the first evening of these last three days, when he came home and was
eating his supper, he noticed the old woman stealing into the stables.

The Prince followed her secretly to see what she was going to do. He
crouched down in the doorway and heard the wicked witch telling the
horses to wait next morning till Iwanich was asleep, and then to go and
hide themselves in the river, and to stay there till she told them to
return; and if they didn’t do as she told them the old woman threatened
to beat them till they bled.

When Iwanich heard all this he went back to his room, determined that
nothing should induce him to fall asleep next day. On the following
morning he led the mare and foal to the fields as usual, but bound a
cord round them both which he kept in his hand.

But after a few hours, by the magic arts of the old witch, he was
overpowered by sleep, and the mare and foal escaped and did as they had
been told to do. The Prince did not awake till late in the evening; and
when he did, he found, to his horror, that the horses had disappeared.
Filled with despair, he cursed the moment when he had entered the
service of the cruel witch, and already he saw his head sticking up on
the sharp spike beside the others.

Then he suddenly remembered the fish’s scale, which, with the eagle’s
feather and the fox’s hairs, he always carried about with him. He drew
the scale from his pocket, and hurrying to the river he threw it in. In
a minute the grateful fish swam towards the bank on which Iwanich was
standing, and said: ‘What do you command, my friend and benefactor?’

The Prince replied: ‘I had to look after a mare and foal, and they have
run away from me and have hidden themselves in the river; if you wish to
save my life drive them back to the land.’

‘Wait a moment,’ answered the fish, ‘and I and my friends will soon
drive them out of the water.’ With these words the creature disappeared
into the depths of the stream.

Almost immediately a rushing hissing sound was heard in the waters, the
waves dashed against the banks, the foam was tossed into the air, and
the two horses leapt suddenly on to the dry land, trembling and shaking
with fear.

Iwanich sprang at once on to the mare’s back, seized the foal by its
bridle, and hastened home in the highest spirits.

When the witch saw the Prince bringing the horses home she could hardly
conceal her wrath, and as soon as she had placed Iwanich’s supper before
him she stole away again to the stables. The Prince followed her, and
heard her scolding the beasts harshly for not having hidden themselves
better. She bade them wait next morning till Iwanich was asleep and then
to hide themselves in the clouds, and to remain there till she called.
If they did not do as she told them she would beat them till they bled.

The next morning, after Iwanich had led his horses to the fields, he
fell once more into a magic sleep. The horses at once ran away and hid
themselves in the clouds, which hung down from the mountains in soft
billowy masses.

When the Prince awoke and found that both the mare and the foal had
disappeared, he bethought him at once of the eagle, and taking the
feather out of his pocket he blew it into the air.

In a moment the bird swooped down beside him and asked: ‘What do you
wish me to do?’

‘My mare and foal,’ replied the Prince, ‘have run away from me, and have
hidden themselves in the clouds; if you wish to save my life, restore
both animals to me.’

‘Wait a minute,’ answered the eagle; ‘with the help of my friends I will
soon drive them back to you.’

With these words the bird flew up into the air and disappeared among the
clouds.

Almost directly Iwanich saw his two horses being driven towards him by
a host of eagles of all sizes. He caught the mare and foal, and having
thanked the eagle he drove them cheerfully home again.

The old witch was more disgusted than ever when she saw him appearing,
and having set his supper before him she stole into the stables, and
Iwanich heard her abusing the horses for not having hidden themselves
better in the clouds. Then she bade them hide themselves next morning,
as soon as Iwanich was asleep, in the King’s hen-house, which stood on
a lonely part of the heath, and to remain there till she called. If they
failed to do as she told them she would certainly beat them this time
till they bled.

On the following morning the Prince drove his horses as usual to the
fields. After he had been overpowered by sleep, as on the former days,
the mare and foal ran away and hid themselves in the royal hen house.

When the Prince awoke and found the horses gone he determined to appeal
to the fox; so, lighting a fire, he threw the two hairs into it, and
in a few moments the fox stood beside him and asked: ‘In what way can I
serve you?’

‘I wish to know,’ replied Iwanich, ‘where the King’s hen-house is.’

‘Hardly an hour’s walk from here,’ answered the fox, and offered to show
the Prince the way to it.

While they were walking along the fox asked him what he wanted to do
at the royal hen-house. The Prince told him of the misfortune that had
befallen him, and of the necessity of recovering the mare and foal.

‘That is no easy matter,’ replied the fox. ‘But wait a moment. I have
an idea. Stand at the door of the hen-house, and wait there for your
horses. In the meantime I will slip in among the hens through a hole in
the wall and give them a good chase, so that the noise they make will
arouse the royal henwives, and they will come to see what is the matter.
When they see the horses they will at once imagine them to be the cause
of the disturbance, and will drive them out. Then you must lay hands on
the mare and foal and catch them.

All turned out exactly as the sly fox had foreseen. The Prince swung
himself on the mare, seized the foal by its bridle, and hurried home.

While he was riding over the heath in the highest of spirits the mare
suddenly said to her rider: ‘You are the first person who has ever
succeeded in outwitting the old witch Corva, and now you may ask what
reward you like for your service. If you promise never to betray me I
will give you a piece of advice which you will do well to follow.’

The Prince promised never to betray her confidence, and the mare
continued: ‘Ask nothing else as a reward than my foal, for it has not
its like in the world, and is not to be bought for love or money; for it
can go from one end of the earth to another in a few minutes. Of course
the cunning Corva will do her best to dissuade you from taking the foal,
and will tell you that it is both idle and sickly; but do not believe
her, and stick to your point.’

Iwanich longed to possess such an animal, and promised the mare to
follow her advice.

This time Corva received him in the most friendly manner, and set a
sumptuous repast before him. As soon as he had finished she asked him
what reward he demanded for his year’s service.

‘Nothing more nor less,’ replied the Prince, ‘than the foal of your
mare.’

The witch pretended to be much astonished at his request, and said that
he deserved something much better than the foal, for the beast was lazy
and nervous, blind in one eye, and, in short, was quite worthless.

But the Prince knew what he wanted, and when the old witch saw that he
had made up his mind to have the foal, she said, ‘I am obliged to keep
my promise and to hand you over the foal; and as I know who you are and
what you want, I will tell you in what way the animal will be useful to
you. The man in the cauldron of boiling pitch, whom you set free, is a
mighty magician; through your curiosity and thoughtlessness Militza came
into his power, and he has transported her and her castle and belongings
into a distant country.

‘You are the only person who can kill him; and in consequence he fears
you to such an extent that he has set spies to watch you, and they
report your movements to him daily.

‘When you have reached him, beware of speaking a single word to him, or
you will fall into the power of his friends. Seize him at once by the
beard and dash him to the ground.’

Iwanich thanked the old witch, mounted his foal, put spurs to its sides,
and they flew like lightning through the air.

Already it was growing dark, when Iwanich perceived some figures in the
distance; they soon came up to them, and then the Prince saw that it
was the magician and his friends who were driving through the air in a
carriage drawn by owls.

When the magician found himself face to face with Iwanich, without hope
of escape, he turned to him with false friendliness and said: ‘Thrice my
kind benefactor!’

But the Prince, without saying a word, seized him at once by his beard
and dashed him to the ground. At the same moment the foal sprang on the
top of the magician and kicked and stamped on him with his hoofs till he
died.

Then Iwanich found himself once more in the palace of his bride, and
Militza herself flew into his arms.

From this time forward they lived in undisturbed peace and happiness
till the end of their lives.




THE MAGIC RING

Once upon a time there lived an old couple who had one son called
Martin. Now when the old man’s time had come, he stretched himself out
on his bed and died. Though all his life long he had toiled and moiled,
he only left his widow and son two hundred florins. The old woman
determined to put by the money for a rainy day; but alas! the rainy day
was close at hand, for their meal was all consumed, and who is prepared
to face starvation with two hundred florins at their disposal? So the
old woman counted out a hundred of her florins, and giving them to
Martin, told him to go into the town and lay in a store of meal for a
year.

So Martin started off for the town. When he reached the meat-market he
found the whole place in turmoil, and a great noise of angry voices and
barking of dogs. Mixing in the crowd, he noticed a stag-hound which the
butchers had caught and tied to a post, and which was being flogged in
a merciless manner. Overcome with pity, Martin spoke to the butchers,
saying:

‘Friends, why are you beating the poor dog so cruelly?’

‘We have every right to beat him,’ they replied; ‘he has just devoured a
newly-killed pig.’

‘Leave off beating him,’ said Martin, ‘and sell him to me instead.’

‘If you choose to buy him,’ answered the butchers derisively; ‘but for
such a treasure we won’t take a penny less than a hundred florins.’

‘A hundred!’ exclaimed Martin. ‘Well, so be it, if you will not take
less;’ and, taking the money out of his pocket, he handed it over in
exchange for the dog, whose name was Schurka.

When Martin got home, his mother met him with the question:

‘Well, what have you bought?’

‘Schurka, the dog,’ replied Martin, pointing to his new possession.
Whereupon his mother became very angry, and abused him roundly. He ought
to be ashamed of himself, when there was scarcely a handful of meal in
the house, to have spent the money on a useless brute like that. On the
following day she sent him back to the town, saying, ‘Here, take our
last hundred florins, and buy provisions with them. I have just emptied
the last grains of meal out of the chest, and baked a bannock; but it
won’t last over to-morrow.’

Just as Martin was entering the town he met a rough-looking peasant who
was dragging a cat after him by a string which was fastened round the
poor beast’s neck.

‘Stop,’ cried Martin; ‘where are you dragging that poor cat?’

‘I mean to drown him,’ was the answer.

‘What harm has the poor beast done?’ said Martin.

‘It has just killed a goose,’ replied the peasant.

‘Don’t drown him, sell him to me instead,’ begged Martin.

‘Not for a hundred florins,’ was the answer.

‘Surely for a hundred florins you’ll sell it?’ said Martin. ‘See! here
is the money;’ and, so saying, he handed him the hundred florins, which
the peasant pocketed, and Martin took possession of the cat, which was
called Waska.

When he reached his home his mother greeted him with the question:

‘Well, what have you brought back?’

‘I have brought this cat, Waska,’ answered Martin.

‘And what besides?’

‘I had no money over to buy anything else with,’ replied Martin.

‘You useless ne’er-do-weel!’ exclaimed his mother in a great passion.
‘Leave the house at once, and go and beg your bread among strangers;’
and as Martin did not dare to contradict her, he called Schurka and
Waska and started off with them to the nearest village in search of
work. On the way he met a rich peasant, who asked him where he was
going.

‘I want to get work as a day labourer,’ he answered.

‘Come along with me, then. But I must tell you I engage my labourers
without wages. If you serve me faithfully for a year, I promise you it
shall be for your advantage.’

So Martin consented, and for a year he worked diligently, and served
his master faithfully, not sparing himself in any way. When the day of
reckoning had come the peasant led him into a barn, and pointing to two
full sacks, said: ‘Take whichever of these you choose.’

Martin examined the contents of the sacks, and seeing that one was full
of silver and the other of sand, he said to himself:

‘There must be some trick about this; I had better take the sand.’ And
throwing the sack over his shoulders he started out into the world,
in search of fresh work. On and on he walked, and at last he reached
a great gloomy wood. In the middle of the wood he came upon a meadow,
where a fire was burning, and in the midst of the fire, surrounded by
flames, was a lovely damsel, more beautiful than anything that Martin
had ever seen, and when she saw him she called to him:

‘Martin, if you would win happiness, save my life. Extinguish the flames
with the sand that you earned in payment of your faithful service.’

‘Truly,’ thought Martin to himself, ‘it would be more sensible to save a
fellow-being’s life with this sand than to drag it about on one’s back,
seeing what a weight it is.’ And forthwith he lowered the sack from his
shoulders and emptied its contents on the flames, and instantly the
fire was extinguished; but at the same moment lo! and behold the lovely
damsel turned into a Serpent, and, darting upon him, coiled itself round
his neck, and whispered lovingly in his ear:

‘Do not be afraid of me, Martin; I love you, and will go with you
through the world. But first you must follow me boldly into my Father’s
Kingdom, underneath the earth; and when we get there, remember this--he
will offer you gold and silver, and dazzling gems, but do not touch
them. Ask him, instead, for the ring which he wears on his little
finger, for in that ring lies a magic power; you have only to throw it
from one hand to the other, and at once twelve young men will appear,
who will do your bidding, no matter how difficult, in a single night.’

So they started on their way, and after much wandering they reached
a spot where a great rock rose straight up in the middle of the road.
Instantly the Serpent uncoiled itself from his neck, and, as it touched
the damp earth, it resumed the shape of the lovely damsel. Pointing to
the rock, she showed him an opening just big enough for a man to wriggle
through. Passing into it, they entered a long underground passage, which
led out on to a wide field, above which spread a blue sky. In the middle
of the field stood a magnificent castle, built out of porphyry, with a
roof of gold and with glittering battlements. And his beautiful guide
told him that this was the palace in which her father lived and reigned
over his kingdom in the Under-world.

Together they entered the palace, and were received by the King with
great kindness. Turning to his daughter, he said:

‘My child, I had almost given up the hope of ever seeing you again.
Where have you been all these years?’

‘My father,’ she replied, ‘I owe my life to this youth, who saved me
from a terrible death.’

Upon which the King turned to Martin with a gracious smile, saying: ‘I
will reward your courage by granting you whatever your heart desires.
Take as much gold, silver, and precious stones as you choose.’

‘I thank you, mighty King, for your gracious offer,’ answered Martin,’
‘but I do not covet either gold, silver, or precious stones; yet if you
will grant me a favour, give me, I beg, the ring from off the little
finger of your royal hand. Every time my eye falls on it I shall think
of your gracious Majesty, and when I marry I shall present it to my
bride.’

So the King took the ring from his finger and gave it to Martin, saying:
‘Take it, good youth; but with it I make one condition--you are never
to confide to anyone that this is a magic ring. If you do, you will
straightway bring misfortune on yourself.’

Martin took the ring, and, having thanked the King, he set out on the
same road by which he had come down into the Under-world. When he had
regained the upper air he started for his old home, and having found his
mother still living in the old house where he had left her, they settled
down together very happily. So uneventful was their life that it
almost seemed as if it would go on in this way always, without let or
hindrance. But one day it suddenly came into his mind that he would like
to get married, and, moreover, that he would choose a very grand wife--a
King’s daughter, in short. But as he did not trust himself as a wooer,
he determined to send his old mother on the mission.

‘You must go to the King,’ he said to her, ‘and demand the hand of his
lovely daughter in marriage for me.’

‘What are you thinking of, my son?’ answered the old woman, aghast at
the idea. ‘Why cannot you marry someone in your own rank? That would be
far more fitting than to send a poor old woman like me a-wooing to the
King’s Court for the hand of a Princess. Why, it is as much as our heads
are worth. Neither my life nor yours would be worth anything if I went
on such a fool’s errand.’

‘Never fear, little mother,’ answered Martin. ‘Trust me; all will be
well. But see that you do not come back without an answer of some kind.’

And so, obedient to her son’s behest, the old woman hobbled off to the
palace, and, without being hindered, reached the courtyard, and began to
mount the flight of steps leading to the royal presence chamber. At
the head of the landing rows of courtiers were collected in magnificent
attire, who stared at the queer old figure, and called to her, and
explained to her, with every kind of sign, that it was strictly
forbidden to mount those steps. But their stern words and forbidding
gestures made no impression whatever on the old woman, and she
resolutely continued to climb the stairs, bent on carrying out her son’s
orders. Upon this some of the courtiers seized her by the arms, and held
her back by sheer force, at which she set up such a yell that the King
himself heard it, and stepped out on to the balcony to see what was the
matter. When he beheld the old woman flinging her arms wildly about, and
heard her scream that she would not leave the place till she had laid
her case before the King, he ordered that she should be brought into
his presence. And forthwith she was conducted into the golden presence
chamber, where, leaning back amongst cushions of royal purple, the King
sat, surrounded by his counsellors and courtiers. Courtesying low, the
old woman stood silent before him. ‘Well, my good old dame, what can I
do for you?’ asked the King.

‘I have come,’ replied Martin’s mother--‘and your Majesty must not be
angry with me--I have come a-wooing.’

‘Is the woman out of her mind?’ said the King, with an angry frown.

But Martin’s mother answered boldly: ‘If the King will only listen
patiently to me, and give me a straightforward answer, he will see that
I am not out of my mind. You, O King, have a lovely daughter to give
in marriage. I have a son--a wooer--as clever a youth and as good a
son-in-law as you will find in your whole kingdom. There is nothing that
he cannot do. Now tell me, O King, plump and plain, will you give your
daughter to my son as wife?’ The King listened to the end of the old
woman’s strange request, but every moment his face grew blacker, and his
features sterner; till all at once he thought to himself, ‘Is it worth
while that I, the King, should be angry with this poor old fool?’ And
all the courtiers and counsellors were amazed when they saw the hard
lines round his mouth and the frown on his brow grow smooth, and heard
the mild but mocking tones in which he answered the old woman, saying:

‘If your son is as wonderfully clever as you say, and if there is
nothing in the world that he cannot do, let him build a magnificent
castle, just opposite my palace windows, in four and twenty hours. The
palace must be joined together by a bridge of pure crystal. On each
side of the bridge there must be growing trees, having golden and silver
apples, and with birds of Paradise among the branches. At the right of
the bridge there must be a church, with five golden cupolas; in this
church your son shall be wedded to my daughter, and we will keep the
wedding festivities in the new castle. But if he fails to execute this
my royal command, then, as a just but mild monarch, I shall give orders
that you and he are taken, and first dipped in tar and then in feathers,
and you shall be executed in the market-place for the entertainment of
my courtiers.’

And a smile played round the King’s lips as he finished speaking, and
his courtiers and counsellors shook with laughter when they thought of
the old woman’s folly, and praised the King’s wise device, and said to
each other, ‘What a joke it will be when we see the pair of them tarred
and feathered! The son is just as able to grow a beard on the palm of
his hand as to execute such a task in twenty-four hours.’

Now the poor old woman was mortally afraid and, in a trembling voice she
asked:

‘Is that really your royal will, O King? Must I take this order to my
poor son?’

‘Yes, old dame; such is my command. If your son carries out my order,
he shall be rewarded with my daughter; but if he fails, away to the
tar-barrel and the stake with you both!’

On her way home the poor old woman shed bitter tears, and when she saw
Martin she told him what the King had said, and sobbed out:

‘Didn’t I tell you, my son, that you should marry someone of your own
rank? It would have been better for us this day if you had. As I told
you, my going to Court has been as much as our lives are worth, and
now we will both be tarred and feathered, and burnt in the public
market-place. It is terrible!’ and she moaned and cried.

‘Never fear, little mother,’ answered Martin; ‘trust me, and you will
see all will be well. You may go to sleep with a quiet mind.’

And, stepping to the front of the hut, Martin threw his ring from the
palm of one hand into the other, upon which twelve youths instantly
appeared, and demanded what he wanted them to do. Then he told them the
King’s commands, and they answered that by next morning all should be
accomplished exactly as the King had ordered.

Next morning when the King awoke, and looked out of his window, to his
amazement he beheld a magnificent castle, just opposite his own palace,
and joined to it a bridge of pure crystal.

At each side of the bridge trees were growing, from whose branches hung
golden and silver apples, among which birds of Paradise perched. At the
right, gleaming in the sun, were the five golden cupolas of a splendid
church, whose bells rang out, as if they would summon people from all
corners of the earth to come and behold the wonder. Now, though the King
would much rather have seen his future son-in-law tarred, feathered, and
burnt at the stake, he remembered his royal oath, and had to make the
best of a bad business. So he took heart of grace, and made Martin a
Duke, and gave his daughter a rich dowry, and prepared the grandest
wedding-feast that had ever been seen, so that to this day the old
people in the country still talk of it.

After the wedding Martin and his royal bride went to dwell in the
magnificent new palace, and here Martin lived in the greatest comfort
and luxury, such luxury as he had never imagined. But though he was as
happy as the day was long, and as merry as a grig, the King’s daughter
fretted all day, thinking of the indignity that had been done her in
making her marry Martin, the poor widow’s son, instead of a rich young
Prince from a foreign country. So unhappy was she that she spent all her
time wondering how she should get rid of her undesirable husband.
And first she determined to learn the secret of his power, and, with
flattering, caressing words, she tried to coax him to tell her how he
was so clever that there was nothing in the world that he could not do.
At first he would tell her nothing; but once, when he was in a yielding
mood, she approached him with a winning smile on her lovely face, and,
speaking flattering words to him, she gave him a potion to drink, with
a sweet, strong taste. And when he had drunk it Martin’s lips were
unsealed, and he told her that all his power lay in the magic ring that
he wore on his finger, and he described to her how to use it, and, still
speaking, he fell into a deep sleep. And when she saw that the potion
had worked, and that he was sound asleep, the Princess took the magic
ring from his finger, and, going into the courtyard, she threw it from
the palm of one hand into the other.

On the instant the twelve youths appeared, and asked her what she
commanded them to do. Then she told them that by the next morning they
were to do away with the castle, and the bridge, and the church, and
put in their stead the humble hut in which Martin used to live with his
mother, and that while he slept her husband was to be carried to his old
lowly room; and that they were to bear her away to the utmost ends of
the earth, where an old King lived who would make her welcome in his
palace, and surround her with the state that befitted a royal Princess.

‘You shall be obeyed,’ answered the twelve youths at the same moment.
And lo and behold! the following morning, when the King awoke and looked
out of his window he beheld to his amazement that the palace, bridge,
church, and trees had all vanished, and there was nothing in their place
but a bare, miserable-looking hut.

Immediately the King sent for his son-in-law, and commanded him to
explain what had happened. But Martin looked at his royal father-in-law,
and answered never a word. Then the King was very angry, and, calling
a council together, he charged Martin with having been guilty of
witchcraft, and of having deceived the King, and having made away with
the Princess; and he was condemned to imprisonment in a high stone
tower, with neither meat nor drink, till he should die of starvation.

Then, in the hour of his dire necessity, his old friends Schurka (the
dog) and Waska (the cat) remembered how Martin had once saved them from
a cruel death; and they took counsel together as to how they should help
him. And Schurka growled, and was of opinion that he would like to tear
everyone in pieces; but Waska purred meditatively, and scratched the
back of her ear with a velvet paw, and remained lost in thought. At the
end of a few minutes she had made up her mind, and, turning to Schurka,
said: ‘Let us go together into the town, and the moment we meet a baker
you must make a rush between his legs and upset the tray from off his
head; I will lay hold of the rolls, and will carry them off to our
master.’ No sooner said than done. Together the two faithful creatures
trotted off into the town, and very soon they met a baker bearing a tray
on his head, and looking round on all sides, while he cried:

     ‘Fresh rolls, sweet cake,
           Fancy bread of every kind.
       Come and buy, come and take,
           Sure you’ll find it to your mind,’


At that moment Schurka made a rush between his legs--the baker stumbled,
the tray was upset, the rolls fell to the ground, and, while the man
angrily pursued Schurka, Waska managed to drag the rolls out of sight
behind a bush. And when a moment later Schurka joined her, they set off
at full tilt to the stone tower where Martin was a prisoner, taking the
rolls with them. Waska, being very agile, climbed up by the outside to
the grated window, and called in an anxious voice:

‘Are you alive, master?’

‘Scarcely alive--almost starved to death,’ answered Martin in a weak
voice. ‘I little thought it would come to this, that I should die of
hunger.’

‘Never fear, dear master. Schurka and I will look after you,’ said
Waska. And in another moment she had climbed down and brought him back a
roll, and then another, and another, till she had brought him the whole
tray-load. Upon which she said: ‘Dear master, Schurka and I are going
off to a distant kingdom at the utmost ends of the earth to fetch you
back your magic ring. You must be careful that the rolls last till our
return.’

And Waska took leave of her beloved master, and set off with Schurka
on their journey. On and on they travelled, looking always to right
and left for traces of the Princess, following up every track, making
inquiries of every cat and dog they met, listening to the talk of every
wayfarer they passed; and at last they heard that the kingdom at the
utmost ends of the earth where the twelve youths had borne the Princess
was not very far off. And at last one day they reached that distant
kingdom, and, going at once to the palace, they began to make friends
with all the dogs and cats in the place, and to question them about
the Princess and the magic ring; but no one could tell them much about
either. Now one day it chanced that Waska had gone down to the palace
cellar to hunt for mice and rats, and seeing an especially fat, well-fed
mouse, she pounced upon it, buried her claws in its soft fur, and was
just going to gobble it up, when she was stopped by the pleading tones
of the little creature, saying, ‘If you will only spare my life I may be
of great service to you. I will do everything in my power for you; for I
am the King of the Mice, and if I perish the whole race will die out.’

‘So be it,’ said Waska. ‘I will spare your life; but in return you must
do something for me. In this castle there lives a Princess, the wicked
wife of my dear master. She has stolen away his magic ring. You must get
it away from her at whatever cost; do you hear? Till you have done this
I won’t take my claws out of your fur.’

‘Good!’ replied the mouse; ‘I will do what you ask.’ And, so saying,
he summoned all the mice in his kingdom together. A countless number
of mice, small and big, brown and grey, assembled, and formed a circle
round their king, who was a prisoner under Waska’s claws. Turning to
them he said: ‘Dear and faithful subjects, who ever among you will steal
the magic ring from the strange Princess will release me from a cruel
death; and I shall honour him above all the other mice in the kingdom.’

Instantly a tiny mouse stepped forward and said: ‘I often creep about
the Princess’s bedroom at night, and I have noticed that she has a ring
which she treasures as the apple of her eye. All day she wears it on her
finger, and at night she keeps it in her mouth. I will undertake, sire,
to steal away the ring for you.’

And the tiny mouse tripped away into the bedroom of the Princess, and
waited for nightfall; then, when the Princess had fallen asleep, it
crept up on to her bed, and gnawed a hole in the pillow, through which
it dragged one by one little down feathers, and threw them under the
Princess’s nose. And the fluff flew into the Princess’s nose, and into
her mouth, and starting up she sneezed and coughed, and the ring fell
out of her mouth on to the coverlet. In a flash the tiny mouse had
seized it, and brought it to Waska as a ransom for the King of the Mice.
Thereupon Waska and Schurka started off, and travelled night and day
till they reached the stone tower where Martin was imprisoned; and the
cat climbed up the window, and called out to him:

‘Martin, dear master, are you still alive?’

‘Ah! Waska, my faithful little cat, is that you?’ replied a weak voice.
‘I am dying of hunger. For three days I have not tasted food.’

‘Be of good heart, dear master,’ replied Waska; ‘from this day forth you
will know nothing but happiness and prosperity. If this were a moment to
trouble you with riddles, I would make you guess what Schurka and I have
brought you back. Only think, we have got you your ring!’

At these words Martin’s joy knew no bounds, and he stroked her fondly,
and she rubbed up against him and purred happily, while below Schurka
bounded in the air, and barked joyfully. Then Martin took the ring, and
threw it from one hand into the other, and instantly the twelve youths
appeared and asked what they were to do.

‘Fetch me first something to eat and drink, as quickly as possible; and
after that bring musicians hither, and let us have music all day long.’

Now when the people in the town and palace heard music coming from the
tower they were filled with amazement, and came to the King with the
news that witchcraft must be going on in Martin’s Tower, for, instead
of dying of starvation, he was seemingly making merry to the sound of
music, and to the clatter of plates, and glass, and knives and forks;
and the music was so enchantingly sweet that all the passers-by stood
still to listen to it. On this the King sent at once a messenger to
the Starvation Tower, and he was so astonished with what he saw that he
remained rooted to the spot. Then the King sent his chief counsellors,
and they too were transfixed with wonder. At last the King came himself,
and he likewise was spellbound by the beauty of the music.

Then Martin summoned the twelve youths, spoke to them, saying, ‘Build up
my castle again, and join it to the King’s Palace with a crystal bridge;
do not forget the trees with the golden and silver apples, and with the
birds of Paradise in the branches; and put back the church with the five
cupolas, and let the bells ring out, summoning the people from the four
corners of the kingdom. And one thing more: bring back my faithless
wife, and lead her into the women’s chamber.’

And it was all done as he commanded, and, leaving the Starvation Tower,
he took the King, his father-in-law, by the arm, and led him into the
new palace, where the Princess sat in fear and trembling, awaiting her
death. And Martin spoke to the King, saying, ‘King and royal father, I
have suffered much at the hands of your daughter. What punishment shall
be dealt to her?’

Then the mild King answered: ‘Beloved Prince and son-in-law, if you love
me, let your anger be turned to grace--forgive my daughter, and restore
her to your heart and favour.’

And Martin’s heart was softened and he forgave his wife, and they lived
happily together ever after. And his old mother came and lived with him,
and he never parted with Schurka and Waska; and I need hardly tell you
that he never again let the ring out of his possession.




THE FLOWER QUEEN’S DAUGHTER(23)

(23) From the Bukowinaer. Von Wliolocki.

A young Prince was riding one day through a meadow that stretched for
miles in front of him, when he came to a deep open ditch. He was turning
aside to avoid it, when he heard the sound of someone crying in the
ditch. He dismounted from his horse, and stepped along in the direction
the sound came from. To his astonishment he found an old woman, who
begged him to help her out of the ditch. The Prince bent down and lifted
her out of her living grave, asking her at the same time how she had
managed to get there.

‘My son,’ answered the old woman, ‘I am a very poor woman, and soon
after midnight I set out for the neighbouring town in order to sell my
eggs in the market on the following morning; but I lost my way in the
dark, and fell into this deep ditch, where I might have remained for
ever but for your kindness.’

Then the Prince said to her, ‘You can hardly walk; I will put you on my
horse and lead you home. Where do you live?’

‘Over there, at the edge of the forest in the little hut you see in the
distance,’ replied the old woman.

The Prince lifted her on to his horse, and soon they reached the hut,
where the old woman got down, and turning to the Prince said, ‘Just wait
a moment, and I will give you something.’ And she disappeared into her
hut, but returned very soon and said, ‘You are a mighty Prince, but
at the same time you have a kind heart, which deserves to be rewarded.
Would you like to have the most beautiful woman in the world for your
wife?’

‘Most certainly I would,’ replied the Prince.

So the old woman continued, ‘The most beautiful woman in the whole world
is the daughter of the Queen of the Flowers, who has been captured by a
dragon. If you wish to marry her, you must first set her free, and this
I will help you to do. I will give you this little bell: if you ring it
once, the King of the Eagles will appear; if you ring it twice, the King
of the Foxes will come to you; and if you ring it three times, you will
see the King of the Fishes by your side. These will help you if you are
in any difficulty. Now farewell, and heaven prosper your undertaking.’
She handed him the little bell, and there disappeared hut and all, as
though the earth had swallowed her up.

Then it dawned on the Prince that he had been speaking to a good fairy,
and putting the little bell carefully in his pocket, he rode home and
told his father that he meant to set the daughter of the Flower Queen
free, and intended setting out on the following day into the wide world
in search of the maid.

So the next morning the Prince mounted his fine horse and left his home.
He had roamed round the world for a whole year, and his horse had died
of exhaustion, while he himself had suffered much from want and misery,
but still he had come on no trace of her he was in search of. At last
one day he came to a hut, in front of which sat a very old man. The
Prince asked him, ‘Do you not know where the Dragon lives who keeps the
daughter of the Flower Queen prisoner?’

‘No, I do not,’ answered the old man. ‘But if you go straight along
this road for a year, you will reach a hut where my father lives, and
possibly he may be able to tell you.’

The Prince thanked him for his information, and continued his journey
for a whole year along the same road, and at the end of it came to
the little hut, where he found a very old man. He asked him the same
question, and the old man answered, ‘No, I do not know where the Dragon
lives. But go straight along this road for another year, and you will
come to a hut in which my father lives. I know he can tell you.’

And so the Prince wandered on for another year, always on the same road,
and at last reached the hut where he found the third old man. He put
the same question to him as he had put to his son and grandson; but this
time the old man answered, ‘The Dragon lives up there on the mountain,
and he has just begun his year of sleep. For one whole year he is always
awake, and the next he sleeps. But if you wish to see the Flower Queen’s
daughter go up the second mountain: the Dragon’s old mother lives there,
and she has a ball every night, to which the Flower Queen’s daughter
goes regularly.’

So the Prince went up the second mountain, where he found a castle all
made of gold with diamond windows. He opened the big gate leading into
the courtyard, and was just going to walk in, when seven dragons rushed
on him and asked him what he wanted?

The Prince replied, ‘I have heard so much of the beauty and kindness of
the Dragon’s Mother, and would like to enter her service.’

This flattering speech pleased the dragons, and the eldest of them said,
‘Well, you may come with me, and I will take you to the Mother Dragon.’

They entered the castle and walked through twelve splendid halls, all
made of gold and diamonds. In the twelfth room they found the Mother
Dragon seated on a diamond throne. She was the ugliest woman under the
sun, and, added to it all, she had three heads. Her appearance was a
great shock to the Prince, and so was her voice, which was like the
croaking of many ravens. She asked him, ‘Why have you come here?’

The Prince answered at once, ‘I have heard so much of your beauty and
kindness, that I would very much like to enter your service.’

‘Very well,’ said the Mother Dragon; ‘but if you wish to enter my
service, you must first lead my mare out to the meadow and look after
her for three days; but if you don’t bring her home safely every
evening, we will eat you up.’

The Prince undertook the task and led the mare out to the meadow.

But no sooner had they reached the grass than she vanished. The Prince
sought for her in vain, and at last in despair sat down on a big stone
and contemplated his sad fate. As he sat thus lost in thought, he
noticed an eagle flying over his head. Then he suddenly bethought him of
his little bell, and taking it out of his pocket he rang it once. In a
moment he heard a rustling sound in the air beside him, and the King of
the Eagles sank at his feet.

‘I know what you want of me,’ the bird said. ‘You are looking for the
Mother Dragon’s mare who is galloping about among the clouds. I will
summon all the eagles of the air together, and order them to catch the
mare and bring her to you.’ And with these words the King of the Eagles
flew away. Towards evening the Prince heard a mighty rushing sound in
the air, and when he looked up he saw thousands of eagles driving the
mare before them. They sank at his feet on to the ground and gave the
mare over to him. Then the Prince rode home to the old Mother Dragon,
who was full of wonder when she saw him, and said, ‘You have succeeded
to-day in looking after my mare, and as a reward you shall come to my
ball to-night.’ She gave him at the same time a cloak made of copper,
and led him to a big room where several young he-dragons and she-dragons
were dancing together. Here, too, was the Flower Queen’s beautiful
daughter. Her dress was woven out of the most lovely flowers in the
world, and her complexion was like lilies and roses. As the Prince was
dancing with her he managed to whisper in her ear, ‘I have come to set
you free!’

Then the beautiful girl said to him, ‘If you succeed in bringing the
mare back safely the third day, ask the Mother Dragon to give you a foal
of the mare as a reward.’

The ball came to an end at midnight, and early next morning the Prince
again led the Mother Dragon’s mare out into the meadow. But again she
vanished before his eyes. Then he took out his little bell and rang it
twice.

In a moment the King of the Foxes stood before him and said: ‘I know
already what you want, and will summon all the foxes of the world
together to find the mare who has hidden herself in a hill.’

With these words the King of the Foxes disappeared, and in the evening
many thousand foxes brought the mare to the Prince.

Then he rode home to the Mother-Dragon, from whom he received this time
a cloak made of silver, and again she led him to the ball-room.

The Flower Queen’s daughter was delighted to see him safe and sound,
and when they were dancing together she whispered in his ear: ‘If you
succeed again to-morrow, wait for me with the foal in the meadow. After
the ball we will fly away together.’

On the third day the Prince led the mare to the meadow again; but once
more she vanished before his eyes. Then the Prince took out his little
bell and rang it three times.

In a moment the King of the Fishes appeared, and said to him: ‘I know
quite well what you want me to do, and I will summon all the fishes
of the sea together, and tell them to bring you back the mare, who is
hiding herself in a river.’

Towards evening the mare was returned to him, and when he led her home
to the Mother Dragon she said to him:

‘You are a brave youth, and I will make you my body-servant. But what
shall I give you as a reward to begin with?’

The Prince begged for a foal of the mare, which the Mother Dragon at
once gave him, and over and above, a cloak made of gold, for she had
fallen in love with him because he had praised her beauty.

So in the evening he appeared at the ball in his golden cloak; but
before the entertainment was over he slipped away, and went straight to
the stables, where he mounted his foal and rode out into the meadow to
wait for the Flower Queen’s daughter. Towards midnight the beautiful
girl appeared, and placing her in front of him on his horse, the
Prince and she flew like the wind till they reached the Flower Queen’s
dwelling. But the dragons had noticed their flight, and woke their
brother out of his year’s sleep. He flew into a terrible rage when
he heard what had happened, and determined to lay siege to the Flower
Queen’s palace; but the Queen caused a forest of flowers as high as the
sky to grow up round her dwelling, through which no one could force a
way.

When the Flower Queen heard that her daughter wanted to marry the
Prince, she said to him: ‘I will give my consent to your marriage
gladly, but my daughter can only stay with you in summer. In winter,
when everything is dead and the ground covered with snow, she must come
and live with me in my palace underground.’ The Prince consented to
this, and led his beautiful bride home, where the wedding was held with
great pomp and magnificence. The young couple lived happily together
till winter came, when the Flower Queen’s daughter departed and went
home to her mother. In summer she returned to her husband, and their
life of joy and happiness began again, and lasted till the approach of
winter, when the Flower Queen’s daughter went back again to her mother.
This coming and going continued all her life long, and in spite of it
they always lived happily together.




THE FLYING SHIP(24)

(24) From the Russian.

Once upon a time there lived an old couple who had three sons; the two
elder were clever, but the third was a regular dunce. The clever sons
were very fond of their mother, gave her good clothes, and always spoke
pleasantly to her; but the youngest was always getting in her way,
and she had no patience with him. Now, one day it was announced in the
village that the King had issued a decree, offering his daughter, the
Princess, in marriage to whoever should build a ship that could fly.
Immediately the two elder brothers determined to try their luck, and
asked their parents’ blessing. So the old mother smartened up their
clothes, and gave them a store of provisions for their journey, not
forgetting to add a bottle of brandy. When they had gone the poor
Simpleton began to tease his mother to smarten him up and let him start
off.

‘What would become of a dolt like you?’ she answered. ‘Why, you would be
eaten up by wolves.’

But the foolish youth kept repeating, ‘I will go, I will go, I will go!’

Seeing that she could do nothing with him, the mother gave him a crust
of bread and a bottle of water, and took no further heed of him.

So the Simpleton set off on his way. When he had gone a short distance
he met a little old manikin. They greeted one another, and the manikin
asked him where he was going.

‘I am off to the King’s Court,’ he answered. ‘He has promised to give
his daughter to whoever can make a flying ship.’

‘And can you make such a ship?’

‘Not I.’

‘Then why in the world are you going?’

‘Can’t tell,’ replied the Simpleton.

‘Well, if that is the case,’ said the manikin, ‘sit down beside me; we
can rest for a little and have something to eat. Give me what you have
got in your satchel.’

Now, the poor Simpleton was ashamed to show what was in it. However, he
thought it best not to make a fuss, so he opened the satchel, and could
scarcely believe his own eyes, for, instead of the hard crust, he saw
two beautiful fresh rolls and some cold meat. He shared them with the
manikin, who licked his lips and said:

‘Now, go into that wood, and stop in front of the first tree, bow three
times, and then strike the tree with your axe, fall on your knees on
the ground, with your face on the earth, and remain there till you are
raised up. You will then find a ship at your side, step into it and fly
to the King’s Palace. If you meet anyone on the way, take him with you.’

The Simpleton thanked the manikin very kindly, bade him farewell, and
went into the road. When he got to the first tree he stopped in front of
it, did everything just as he had been told, and, kneeling on the ground
with his face to the earth, fell asleep. After a little time he was
aroused; he awoke and, rubbing his eyes, saw a ready-made ship at his
side, and at once got into it.

And the ship rose and rose, and in another minute was flying through the
air, when the Simpleton, who was on the look out, cast his eyes down to
the earth and saw a man beneath him on the road, who was kneeling with
his ear upon the damp ground.

‘Hallo!’ he called out, ‘what are you doing down there?’

‘I am listening to what is going on in the world,’ replied the man.

‘Come with me in my ship,’ said the Simpleton.

So the man was only too glad, and got in beside him; and the ship flew,
and flew, and flew through the air, till again from his outlook the
Simpleton saw a man on the road below, who was hopping on one leg, while
his other leg was tied up behind his ear. So he hailed him, calling out:

‘Hallo! what are you doing, hopping on one leg?’

‘I can’t help it,’ replied the man. ‘I walk so fast that unless I tied
up one leg I should be at the end of the earth in a bound.’

‘Come with us on my ship,’ he answered; and the man made no objections,
but joined them; and the ship flew on, and on, and on, till suddenly the
Simpleton, looking down on the road below, beheld a man aiming with a
gun into the distance.

‘Hallo!’ he shouted to him, ‘what are you aiming at? As far as eye can
see, there is no bird in sight.’

‘What would be the good of my taking a near shot?’ replied the man; ‘I
can hit beast or bird at a hundred miles’ distance. That is the kind of
shot I enjoy.’

‘Come into the ship with us,’ answered the Simpleton; and the man was
only too glad to join them, and he got in; and the ship flew on, farther
and farther, till again the Simpleton from his outlook saw a man on the
road below, carrying on his back a basket full of bread. And he waved to
him, calling out:

‘Hallo! where are you going?’

‘To fetch bread for my breakfast.’

‘Bread? Why, you have got a whole basket-load of it on your back.’

‘That’s nothing,’ answered the man; ‘I should finish that in one
mouthful.’

‘Come along with us in my ship, then.’

And so the glutton joined the party, and the ship mounted again into the
air, and flew up and onward, till the Simpleton from his outlook saw
a man walking by the shore of a great lake, and evidently looking for
something.

‘Hallo!’ he cried to him,’ what are you seeking?

‘I want water to drink, I’m so thirsty,’ replied the man.

‘Well, there’s a whole lake in front of you; why don’t you drink some of
that?’

‘Do you call that enough?’ answered the other. ‘Why, I should drink it
up in one gulp.’

‘Well, come with us in the ship.’

And so the mighty drinker was added to the company; and the ship flew
farther, and even farther, till again the Simpleton looked out, and this
time he saw a man dragging a bundle of wood, walking through the forest
beneath them.

‘Hallo!’ he shouted to him, ‘why are you carrying wood through a
forest?’

‘This is not common wood,’ answered the other.

‘What sort of wood is it, then?’ said the Simpleton.

‘If you throw it upon the ground,’ said the man, ‘it will be changed
into an army of soldiers.’

‘Come into the ship with us, then.’

And so he too joined them; and away the ship flew on, and on, and on,
and once more the Simpleton looked out, and this time he saw a man
carrying straw upon his back.

‘Hallo! Where are you carrying that straw to?’

‘To the village,’ said the man.

‘Do you mean to say there is no straw in the village?’

‘Ah! but this is quite a peculiar straw. If you strew it about even in
the hottest summer the air at once becomes cold, and snow falls, and the
people freeze.’

Then the Simpleton asked him also to join them.

At last the ship, with its strange crew, arrived at the King’s Court.
The King was having his dinner, but he at once despatched one of his
courtiers to find out what the huge, strange new bird could be that had
come flying through the air. The courtier peeped into the ship, and,
seeing what it was, instantly went back to the King and told him that it
was a flying ship, and that it was manned by a few peasants.

Then the King remembered his royal oath; but he made up his mind that
he would never consent to let the Princess marry a poor peasant. So he
thought and thought, and then said to himself:

‘I will give him some impossible tasks to perform; that will be the best
way of getting rid of him.’ And he there and then decided to despatch
one of his courtiers to the Simpleton, with the command that he was
to fetch the King the healing water from the world’s end before he had
finished his dinner.

But while the King was still instructing the courtier exactly what
he was to say, the first man of the ship’s company, the one with the
miraculous power of hearing, had overheard the King’s words, and hastily
reported them to the poor Simpleton.

‘Alas, alas!’ he cried; ‘what am I to do now? It would take me quite a
year, possibly my whole life, to find the water.’

‘Never fear,’ said his fleet-footed comrade, ‘I will fetch what the King
wants.’

Just then the courtier arrived, bearing the King’s command.

‘Tell his Majesty,’ said the Simpleton, ‘that his orders shall be
obeyed; ‘and forthwith the swift runner unbound the foot that was strung
up behind his ear and started off, and in less than no time had reached
the world’s end and drawn the healing water from the well.

‘Dear me,’ he thought to himself, ‘that’s rather tiring! I’ll just rest
for a few minutes; it will be some little time yet before the King has
got to dessert.’ So he threw himself down on the grass, and, as the sun
was very dazzling, he closed his eyes, and in a few seconds had fallen
sound asleep.

In the meantime all the ship’s crew were anxiously awaiting him; the
King’s dinner would soon be finished, and their comrade had not yet
returned. So the man with the marvellous quick hearing lay down and,
putting his ear to the ground, listened.

‘That’s a nice sort of fellow!’ he suddenly exclaimed. ‘He’s lying on
the ground, snoring hard!’

At this the marksman seized his gun, took aim, and fired in the
direction of the world’s end, in order to awaken the sluggard. And a
moment later the swift runner reappeared, and, stepping on board the
ship, handed the healing water to the Simpleton. So while the King was
still sitting at table finishing his dinner news was brought to him that
his orders had been obeyed to the letter.

What was to be done now? The King determined to think of a still more
impossible task. So he told another courtier to go to the Simpleton with
the command that he and his comrades were instantly to eat up twelve
oxen and twelve tons of bread. Once more the sharp-eared comrade
overheard the King’s words while he was still talking to the courtier,
and reported them to the Simpleton.

‘Alas, alas!’ he sighed; ‘what in the world shall I do? Why, it would
take us a year, possibly our whole lives, to eat up twelve oxen and
twelve tons of bread.’

‘Never fear,’ said the glutton. ‘It will scarcely be enough for me, I’m
so hungry.’

So when the courtier arrived with the royal message he was told to take
back word to the King that his orders should be obeyed. Then twelve
roasted oxen and twelve tons of bread were brought alongside of the
ship, and at one sitting the glutton had devoured it all.

‘I call that a small meal,’ he said. ‘I wish they’d brought me some
more.’

Next, the King ordered that forty casks of wine, containing forty
gallons each, were to be drunk up on the spot by the Simpleton and his
party. When these words were overheard by the sharp-eared comrade and
repeated to the Simpleton, he was in despair.

‘Alas, alas!’ he exclaimed; ‘what is to be done? It would take us a
year, possibly our whole lives, to drink so much.’

‘Never fear,’ said his thirsty comrade. ‘I’ll drink it all up at a
gulp, see if I don’t.’ And sure enough, when the forty casks of wine
containing forty gallons each were brought alongside of the ship, they
disappeared down the thirsty comrade’s throat in no time; and when they
were empty he remarked:

‘Why, I’m still thirsty. I should have been glad of two more casks.’

Then the King took counsel with himself and sent an order to the
Simpleton that he was to have a bath, in a bath-room at the royal
palace, and after that the betrothal should take place. Now the
bath-room was built of iron, and the King gave orders that it was to
be heated to such a pitch that it would suffocate the Simpleton. And so
when the poor silly youth entered the room, he discovered that the iron
walls were red hot. But, fortunately, his comrade with the straw on his
back had entered behind him, and when the door was shut upon them he
scattered the straw about, and suddenly the red-hot walls cooled down,
and it became so very cold that the Simpleton could scarcely bear to
take a bath, and all the water in the room froze. So the Simpleton
climbed up upon the stove, and, wrapping himself up in the bath
blankets, lay there the whole night. And in the morning when they opened
the door there he lay sound and safe, singing cheerfully to himself.

Now when this strange tale was told to the King he became quite sad,
not knowing what he should do to get rid of so undesirable a son-in-law,
when suddenly a brilliant idea occurred to him.

‘Tell the rascal to raise me an army, now at this instant!’ he exclaimed
to one of his courtiers. ‘Inform him at once of this, my royal will.’
And to himself he added, ‘I think I shall do for him this time.’

As on former occasions, the quick-eared comrade had overheard the King’s
command and repeated it to the Simpleton.

‘Alas, alas!’ he groaned; ‘now I am quite done for.’

‘Not at all,’ replied one of his comrades (the one who had dragged the
bundle of wood through the forest). ‘Have you quite forgotten me?’

In the meantime the courtier, who had run all the way from the palace,
reached the ship panting and breathless, and delivered the King’s
message.

‘Good!’ remarked the Simpleton. ‘I will raise an army for the King,’ and
he drew himself up. ‘But if, after that, the King refuses to accept me
as his son-in-law, I will wage war against him, and carry the Princess
off by force.’

During the night the Simpleton and his comrade went, together into a big
field, not forgetting to take the bundle of wood with them, which the
man spread out in all directions--and in a moment a mighty army stood
upon the spot, regiment on regiment of foot and horse soldiers; the
bugles sounded and the drums beat, the chargers neighed, and their
riders put their lances in rest, and the soldiers presented arms.

In the morning when the King awoke he was startled by these warlike
sounds, the bugles and the drums, and the clatter of the horses, and the
shouts of the soldiers. And, stepping to the window, he saw the lances
gleam in the sunlight and the armour and weapons glitter. And the proud
monarch said to himself, ‘I am powerless in comparison with this man.’
So he sent him royal robes and costly jewels, and commanded him to come
to the palace to be married to the Princess. And his son-in-law put
on the royal robes, and he looked so grand and stately that it was
impossible to recognise the poor Simpleton, so changed was he; and the
Princess fell in love with him as soon as ever she saw him.

Never before had so grand a wedding been seen, and there was so much
food and wine that even the glutton and the thirsty comrade had enough
to eat and drink.




THE SNOW-DAUGHTER AND THE FIRE-SON(25)

(25) From the Bukowinaer Tales and Legends. Von Wliolocki.

There was once upon a time a man and his wife, and they had no children,
which was a great grief to them. One winter’s day, when the sun was
shining brightly, the couple were standing outside their cottage, and
the woman was looking at all the little icicles which hung from the
roof. She sighed, and turning to her husband said, ‘I wish I had as many
children as there are icicles hanging there.’ ‘Nothing would please me
more either,’ replied her husband. Then a tiny icicle detached itself
from the roof, and dropped into the woman’s mouth, who swallowed it with
a smile, and said, ‘Perhaps I shall give birth to a snow child now!’ Her
husband laughed at his wife’s strange idea, and they went back into the
house.

But after a short time the woman gave birth to a little girl, who was
as white as snow and as cold as ice. If they brought the child anywhere
near the fire, it screamed loudly till they put it back into some cool
place. The little maid throve wonderfully, and in a few months she could
run about and speak. But she was not altogether easy to bring up, and
gave her parents much trouble and anxiety, for all summer she insisted
on spending in the cellar, and in the winter she would sleep outside in
the snow, and the colder it was the happier she seemed to be. Her father
and mother called her simply ‘Our Snow-daughter,’ and this name stuck to
her all her life.

One day her parents sat by the fire, talking over the extraordinary
behaviour of their daughter, who was disporting herself in the snowstorm
that raged outside. The woman sighed deeply and said, ‘I wish I had
given birth to a Fire-son!’ As she said these words, a spark from the
big wood fire flew into the woman’s lap, and she said with a laugh, ‘Now
perhaps I shall give birth to a Fire-son!’ The man laughed at his wife’s
words, and thought it was a good joke. But he ceased to think it a
joke when his wife shortly afterwards gave birth to a boy, who screamed
lustily till he was put quite close to the fire, and who nearly yelled
himself into a fit if the Snow-daughter came anywhere near him. The
Snow-daughter herself avoided him as much as she could, and always crept
into a corner as far away from him as possible. The parents called the
boy simply ‘Our Fire-son,’ a name which stuck to him all his life. They
had a great deal of trouble and worry with him too; but he throve and
grew very quickly, and before he was a year old he could run about and
talk. He was as red as fire, and as hot to touch, and he always sat on
the hearth quite close to the fire, and complained of the cold; if his
sister were in the room he almost crept into the flames, while the girl
on her part always complained of the great heat if her brother were
anywhere near. In summer the boy always lay out in the sun, while the
girl hid herself in the cellar: so it happened that the brother and
sister came very little into contact with each other--in fact, they
carefully avoided it.

Just as the girl grew up into a beautiful woman, her father and mother
both died one after the other. Then the Fire-son, who had grown up in
the meantime into a fine, strong young man, said to his sister, ‘I am
going out into the world, for what is the use of remaining on here?’

‘I shall go with you,’ she answered, ‘for, except you, I have no one in
the world, and I have a feeling that if we set out together we shall be
lucky.’

The Fire-son said, ‘I love you with all my heart, but at the same time
I always freeze if you are near me, and you nearly die of heat if I
approach you! How shall we travel about together without being odious
the one to the other?’

‘Don’t worry about that,’ replied the girl, ‘for I’ve thought it all
over, and have settled on a plan which will make us each able to bear
with the other! See, I have had a fur cloak made for each of us, and if
we put them on I shall not feel the heat so much nor you the cold.’ So
they put on the fur cloaks, and set out cheerfully on their way, and for
the first time in their lives quite happy in each other’s company.

For a long time the Fire-son and the Snow-daughter wandered through the
world, and when at the beginning of winter they came to a big wood they
determined to stay there till spring. The Fire-son built himself a hut
where he always kept up a huge fire, while his sister with very few
clothes on stayed outside night and day. Now it happened one day that
the King of the land held a hunt in this wood, and saw the Snow-daughter
wandering about in the open air. He wondered very much who the beautiful
girl clad in such garments could be, and he stopped and spoke to her.
He soon learnt that she could not stand heat, and that her brother could
not endure cold. The King was so charmed by the Snow-daughter, that he
asked her to be his wife. The girl consented, and the wedding was held
with much state. The King had a huge house of ice made for his wife
underground, so that even in summer it did not melt. But for his
brother-in-law he had a house built with huge ovens all round it, that
were kept heated all day and night. The Fire-son was delighted, but
the perpetual heat in which he lived made his body so hot, that it was
dangerous to go too close to him.

One day the King gave a great feast, and asked his brother-in-law
among the other guests. The Fire-son did not appear till everyone had
assembled, and when he did, everyone fled outside to the open air, so
intense was the heat he gave forth. Then the King was very angry and
said, ‘If I had known what a lot of trouble you would have been, I would
never have taken you into my house.’ Then the Fire-son replied with a
laugh, ‘Don’t be angry, dear brother! I love heat and my sister loves
cold--come here and let me embrace you, and then I’ll go home at once.’
And before the King had time to reply, the Fire-son seized him in a
tight embrace. The King screamed aloud in agony, and when his wife, the
Snow-daughter, who had taken refuge from her brother in the next room,
hurried to him, the King lay dead on the ground burnt to a cinder. When
the Snow-daughter saw this she turned on her brother and flew at him.
Then a fight began, the like of which had never been seen on earth. When
the people, attracted by the noise, hurried to the spot, they saw the
Snow-daughter melting into water and the Fire-son burn to a cinder. And
so ended the unhappy brother and sister.




THE STORY OF KING FROST (26)

(26) From the Russian.

There was once upon a time a peasant-woman who had a daughter and a
step-daughter. The daughter had her own way in everything, and whatever
she did was right in her mother’s eyes; but the poor step-daughter had
a hard time. Let her do what she would, she was always blamed, and got
small thanks for all the trouble she took; nothing was right, everything
wrong; and yet, if the truth were known, the girl was worth her weight
in gold--she was so unselfish and good-hearted. But her step-mother did
not like her, and the poor girl’s days were spent in weeping; for it
was impossible to live peacefully with the woman. The wicked shrew was
determined to get rid of the girl by fair means or foul, and kept saying
to her father: ‘Send her away, old man; send her away--anywhere so that
my eyes sha’n’t be plagued any longer by the sight of her, or my ears
tormented by the sound of her voice. Send her out into the fields, and
let the cutting frost do for her.’

In vain did the poor old father weep and implore her pity; she was firm,
and he dared not gainsay her. So he placed his daughter in a sledge,
not even daring to give her a horse-cloth to keep herself warm with, and
drove her out on to the bare, open fields, where he kissed her and left
her, driving home as fast as he could, that he might not witness her
miserable death.

Deserted by her father, the poor girl sat down under a fir-tree at the
edge of the forest and began to weep silently. Suddenly she heard a
faint sound: it was King Frost springing from tree to tree, and cracking
his fingers as he went. At length he reached the fir-tree beneath which
she was sitting, and with a crisp crackling sound he alighted beside
her, and looked at her lovely face.

‘Well, maiden,’ he snapped out, ‘do you know who I am? I am King Frost,
king of the red-noses.’

‘All hail to you, great King!’ answered the girl, in a gentle, trembling
voice. ‘Have you come to take me?’

‘Are you warm, maiden?’ he replied.

‘Quite warm, King Frost,’ she answered, though she shivered as she
spoke.

Then King Frost stooped down, and bent over the girl, and the crackling
sound grew louder, and the air seemed to be full of knives and darts;
and again he asked:

‘Maiden, are you warm? Are you warm, you beautiful girl?’

And though her breath was almost frozen on her lips, she whispered
gently, ‘Quite warm, King Frost.’

Then King Frost gnashed his teeth, and cracked his fingers, and his eyes
sparkled, and the crackling, crisp sound was louder than ever, and for
the last time he asked her:

‘Maiden, are you still warm? Are you still warm, little love?’

And the poor girl was so stiff and numb that she could just gasp, ‘Still
warm, O King!’

Now her gentle, courteous words and her uncomplaining ways touched
King Frost, and he had pity on her, and he wrapped her up in furs, and
covered her with blankets, and he fetched a great box, in which were
beautiful jewels and a rich robe embroidered in gold and silver. And she
put it on, and looked more lovely than ever, and King Frost stepped with
her into his sledge, with six white horses.

In the meantime the wicked step-mother was waiting at home for news of
the girl’s death, and preparing pancakes for the funeral feast. And she
said to her husband: ‘Old man, you had better go out into the fields and
find your daughter’s body and bury her.’ Just as the old man was leaving
the house the little dog under the table began to bark, saying:

     ‘YOUR daughter shall live to be your delight;
      HER daughter shall die this very night.’

‘Hold your tongue, you foolish beast!’ scolded the woman. ‘There’s a
pancake for you, but you must say:

     “HER daughter shall have much silver and gold;
      HIS daughter is frozen quite stiff and cold.”’

But the doggie ate up the pancake and barked, saying:

     ‘His daughter shall wear a crown on her head;
      Her daughter shall die unwooed, unwed.’


Then the old woman tried to coax the doggie with more pancakes and
to terrify it with blows, but he barked on, always repeating the same
words. And suddenly the door creaked and flew open, and a great heavy
chest was pushed in, and behind it came the step-daughter, radiant and
beautiful, in a dress all glittering with silver and gold. For a moment
the step-mother’s eyes were dazzled. Then she called to her husband:
‘Old man, yoke the horses at once into the sledge, and take my daughter
to the same field and leave her on the same spot exactly; ‘and so the
old man took the girl and left her beneath the same tree where he had
parted from his daughter. In a few minutes King Frost came past, and,
looking at the girl, he said:

‘Are you warm, maiden?’

‘What a blind old fool you must be to ask such a question!’ she answered
angrily. ‘Can’t you see that my hands and feet are nearly frozen?’

Then King Frost sprang to and fro in front of her, questioning her, and
getting only rude, rough words in reply, till at last he got very angry,
and cracked his fingers, and gnashed his teeth, and froze her to death.

But in the hut her mother was waiting for her return, and as she grew
impatient she said to her husband: ‘Get out the horses, old man, to go
and fetch her home; but see that you are careful not to upset the sledge
and lose the chest.’

But the doggie beneath the table began to bark, saying:

     ‘Your daughter is frozen quite stiff and cold,
      And shall never have a chest full of gold.’

‘Don’t tell such wicked lies!’ scolded the woman. ‘There’s a cake for
you; now say:

     “HER daughter shall marry a mighty King.”

At that moment the door flew open, and she rushed out to meet her
daughter, and as she took her frozen body in her arms she too was
chilled to death.




THE DEATH OF THE SUN-HERO (27)

(27) From the Bukowinaer Tales and Legends. Von Wliolocki.

Many, many thousand years ago there lived a mighty King whom heaven had
blessed with a clever and beautiful son. When he was only ten years old
the boy was cleverer than all the King’s counsellors put together, and
when he was twenty he was the greatest hero in the whole kingdom. His
father could not make enough of his son, and always had him clothed in
golden garments which shone and sparkled like the sun; and his mother
gave him a white horse, which never slept, and which flew like the
wind. All the people in the land loved him dearly, and called him the
Sun-Hero, for they did not think his like existed under the sun. Now
it happened one night that both his parents had the same extraordinary
dream. They dreamt that a girl all dressed in red had come to them and
said: ‘If you wish that your son should really become the Sun-Hero in
deed and not only in name, let him go out into the world and search for
the Tree of the Sun, and when he has found it, let him pluck a golden
apple from it and bring it home.’

When the King and Queen had each related their dreams to the other,
they were much amazed that they should both have dreamt exactly the same
about their son, and the King said to his wife, ‘This is clearly a sign
from heaven that we should send our son out into the world in order that
he may come home the great Sun-Hero, as the Red Girl said, not only in
name but in deed.’

The Queen consented with many tears, and the King at once bade his son
set forth in search of the Tree of the Sun, from which he was to pluck
a golden apple. The Prince was delighted at the prospect, and set out on
his travels that very day.

For a long time he wandered all through the world, and it was not till
the ninety-ninth day after he started that he found an old man who
was able to tell him where the Tree of the Sun grew. He followed his
directions, and rode on his way, and after another ninety-nine days
he arrived at a golden castle, which stood in the middle of a vast
wilderness. He knocked at the door, which was opened noiselessly and by
invisible hands. Finding no one about, the Prince rode on, and came to
a great meadow, where the Sun-Tree grew. When he reached the tree he put
out his hand to pick a golden apple; but all of a sudden the tree grew
higher, so that he could not reach its fruit. Then he heard some one
behind him laughing. Turning round, he saw the girl in red walking
towards him, who addressed him in these words:

‘Do you really imagine, brave son of the earth, that you can pluck an
apple so easily from the Tree of the Sun? Before you can do that, you
have a difficult task before you. You must guard the tree for nine days
and nine nights from the ravages of two wild black wolves, who will try
to harm it. Do you think you can undertake this?’

‘Yes,’ answered the Sun-Hero, ‘I will guard the Tree of the Sun nine
days and nine nights.’

Then the girl continued: ‘Remember, though, if you do not succeed the
Sun will kill you. Now begin your watch.’

With these words the Red Girl went back into the golden castle. She had
hardly left him when the two black wolves appeared: but the Sun-Hero
beat them off with his sword, and they retired, only, however, to
reappear in a very short time. The Sun-Hero chased them away once more,
but he had hardly sat down to rest when the two black wolves were on
the scene again. This went on for seven days and nights, when the white
horse, who had never done such a thing before, turned to the Sun-Hero
and said in a human voice: ‘Listen to what I am going to say. A Fairy
gave me to your mother in order that I might be of service to you; so
let me tell you, that if you go to sleep and let the wolves harm the
tree, the Sun will surely kill you. The Fairy, foreseeing this, put
everyone in the world under a spell, which prevents their obeying the
Sun’s command to take your life. But all the same, she has forgotten
one person, who will certainly kill you if you fall asleep and let the
wolves damage the tree. So watch and keep the wolves away.’

Then the Sun-Hero strove with all his might and kept the black wolves
at bay, and conquered his desire to sleep; but on the eighth night his
strength failed him, and he fell fast asleep. When he awoke a woman in
black stood beside him, who said: ‘You have fulfilled your task very
badly, for you have let the two black wolves damage the Tree of the Sun.
I am the mother of the Sun, and I command you to ride away from here at
once, and I pronounce sentence of death upon you, for you proudly let
yourself be called the Sun-Hero without having done anything to deserve
the name.’

The youth mounted his horse sadly, and rode home. The people all
thronged round him on his return, anxious to hear his adventures, but
he told them nothing, and only to his mother did he confide what had
befallen him. But the old Queen laughed, and said to her son: ‘Don’t
worry, my child; you see, the Fairy has protected you so far, and the
Sun has found no one to kill you. So cheer up and be happy.’

After a time the Prince forgot all about his adventure, and married a
beautiful Princess, with whom he lived very happily for some time. But
one day when he was out hunting he felt very thirsty, and coming to a
stream he stooped down to drink from it, and this caused his death, for
a crab came swimming up, and with its claws tore out his tongue. He was
carried home in a dying condition, and as he lay on his death-bed
the black woman appeared and said: ‘So the Sun has, after all, found
someone, who was not under the Fairy’s spell, who has caused your death.
And a similar fate will overtake everyone under the Sun who wrongfully
assumes a title to which he has no right.’




THE WITCH (28)

(28) From the Russian.

Once upon a time there was a peasant whose wife died, leaving him with
two children--twins--a boy and a girl. For some years the poor man
lived on alone with the children, caring for them as best he could; but
everything in the house seemed to go wrong without a woman to look after
it, and at last he made up his mind to marry again, feeling that a
wife would bring peace and order to his household and take care of his
motherless children. So he married, and in the following years several
children were born to him; but peace and order did not come to the
household. For the step-mother was very cruel to the twins, and beat
them, and half-starved them, and constantly drove them out of the house;
for her one idea was to get them out of the way. All day she thought
of nothing but how she should get rid of them; and at last an evil idea
came into her head, and she determined to send them out into the great
gloomy wood where a wicked witch lived. And so one morning she spoke to
them, saying:

‘You have been such good children that I am going to send you to visit
my granny, who lives in a dear little hut in the wood. You will have to
wait upon her and serve her, but you will be well rewarded, for she will
give you the best of everything.’

So the children left the house together; and the little sister, who was
very wise for her years, said to the brother:

‘We will first go and see our own dear grandmother, and tell her where
our step-mother is sending us.’

And when the grandmother heard where they were going, she cried and
said:

‘You poor motherless children! How I pity you; and yet I can do nothing
to help you! Your step-mother is not sending you to her granny, but to
a wicked witch who lives in that great gloomy wood. Now listen to me,
children. You must be civil and kind to everyone, and never say a cross
word to anyone, and never touch a crumb belonging to anyone else. Who
knows if, after all, help may not be sent to you?’

And she gave her grandchildren a bottle of milk and a piece of ham and
a loaf of bread, and they set out for the great gloomy wood. When they
reached it they saw in front of them, in the thickest of the trees, a
queer little hut, and when they looked into it, there lay the witch,
with her head on the threshold of the door, with one foot in one corner
and the other in the other corner, and her knees cocked up, almost
touching the ceiling.

‘Who’s there?’ she snarled, in an awful voice, when she saw the
children.

And they answered civilly, though they were so terrified that they hid
behind one another, and said:

‘Good-morning, granny; our step-mother has sent us to wait upon you, and
serve you.’

‘See that you do it well, then,’ growled the witch. ‘If I am pleased
with you, I’ll reward you; but if I am not, I’ll put you in a pan and
fry you in the oven--that’s what I’ll do with you, my pretty dears! You
have been gently reared, but you’ll find my work hard enough. See if you
don’t.’

And, so saying, she set the girl down to spin yarn, and she gave the boy
a sieve in which to carry water from the well, and she herself went
out into the wood. Now, as the girl was sitting at her distaff, weeping
bitterly because she could not spin, she heard the sound of hundreds
of little feet, and from every hole and corner in the hut mice came
pattering along the floor, squeaking and saying:

          ‘Little girl, why are your eyes so red?
          If you want help, then give us some bread.’

And the girl gave them the bread that her grandmother had given her.
Then the mice told her that the witch had a cat, and the cat was very
fond of ham; if she would give the cat her ham, it would show her the
way out of the wood, and in the meantime they would spin the yarn for
her. So the girl set out to look for the cat, and, as she was hunting
about, she met her brother, in great trouble because he could not carry
water from the well in a sieve, as it came pouring out as fast as he
put it in. And as she was trying to comfort him they heard a rustling of
wings, and a flight of wrens alighted on the ground beside them. And the
wrens said:

          ‘Give us some crumbs, then you need not grieve.

          For you’ll find that water will stay in the sieve.’

Then the twins crumbled their bread on the ground, and the wrens pecked
it, and chirruped and chirped. And when they had eaten the last crumb
they told the boy to fill up the holes of the sieve with clay, and then
to draw water from the well. So he did what they said, and carried the
sieve full of water into the hut without spilling a drop. When they
entered the hut the cat was curled up on the floor. So they stroked her,
and fed her with ham, and said to her:

‘Pussy, grey pussy, tell us how we are to get away from the witch?’

Then the cat thanked them for the ham, and gave them a
pocket-handkerchief and a comb, and told them that when the witch
pursued them, as she certainly would, all they had to do was to throw
the handkerchief on the ground and run as fast as they could. As soon as
the handkerchief touched the ground a deep, broad river would spring up,
which would hinder the witch’s progress. If she managed to get across
it, they must throw the comb behind them and run for their lives, for
where the comb fell a dense forest would start up, which would delay the
witch so long that they would be able to get safely away.

The cat had scarcely finished speaking when the witch returned to see if
the children had fulfilled their tasks.

‘Well, you have done well enough for to-day,’ she grumbled; ‘but
to-morrow you’ll have something more difficult to do, and if you don’t
do it well, you pampered brats, straight into the oven you go.’

Half-dead with fright, and trembling in every limb, the poor children
lay down to sleep on a heap of straw in the corner of the hut; but they
dared not close their eyes, and scarcely ventured to breathe. In the
morning the witch gave the girl two pieces of linen to weave before
night, and the boy a pile of wood to cut into chips. Then the witch left
them to their tasks, and went out into the wood. As soon as she had
gone out of sight the children took the comb and the handkerchief, and,
taking one another by the hand, they started and ran, and ran, and ran.
And first they met the watch-dog, who was going to leap on them and tear
them to pieces; but they threw the remains of their bread to him, and
he ate them and wagged his tail. Then they were hindered by the
birch-trees, whose branches almost put their eyes out. But the little
sister tied the twigs together with a piece of ribbon, and they got past
safely, and, after running through the wood, came out on to the open
fields.

In the meantime in the hut the cat was busy weaving the linen and
tangling the threads as it wove. And the witch returned to see how the
children were getting on; and she crept up to the window, and whispered:

‘Are you weaving, my little dear?’

‘Yes, granny, I am weaving,’ answered the cat.

When the witch saw that the children had escaped her, she was furious,
and, hitting the cat with a porringer, she said: ‘Why did you let the
children leave the hut? Why did you not scratch their eyes out?’

But the cat curled up its tail and put its back up, and answered: ‘I
have served you all these years and you never even threw me a bone, but
the dear children gave me their own piece of ham.’

Then the witch was furious with the watch-dog and with the birch-trees,
because they had let the children pass. But the dog answered:

‘I have served you all these years and you never gave me so much as a
hard crust, but the dear children gave me their own loaf of bread.’

And the birch rustled its leaves, and said: ‘I have served you longer
than I can say, and you never tied a bit of twine even round my
branches; and the dear children bound them up with their brightest
ribbons.’

So the witch saw there was no help to be got from her old servants, and
that the best thing she could do was to mount on her broom and set off
in pursuit of the children. And as the children ran they heard the sound
of the broom sweeping the ground close behind them, so instantly they
threw the handkerchief down over their shoulder, and in a moment a deep,
broad river flowed behind them.

When the witch came up to it, it took her a long time before she found a
place which she could ford over on her broom-stick; but at last she got
across, and continued the chase faster than before. And as the children
ran they heard a sound, and the little sister put her ear to the ground,
and heard the broom sweeping the earth close behind them; so, quick as
thought, she threw the comb down on the ground, and in an instant,
as the cat had said, a dense forest sprung up, in which the roots and
branches were so closely intertwined, that it was impossible to force a
way through it. So when the witch came up to it on her broom she found
that there was nothing for it but to turn round and go back to her hut.

But the twins ran straight on till they reached their own home. Then
they told their father all that they had suffered, and he was so angry
with their step-mother that he drove her out of the house, and never let
her return; but he and the children lived happily together; and he took
care of them himself, and never let a stranger come near them.




THE HAZEL-NUT CHILD (29)

(29) From the Bukowniaer. Van Wliolocki.

There was once upon a time a couple who had no children, and they prayed
Heaven every day to send them a child, though it were no bigger than
a hazel-nut. At last Heaven heard their prayer and sent them a child
exactly the size of a hazel-nut, and it never grew an inch. The parents
were very devoted to the little creature, and nursed and tended it
carefully. Their tiny son too was as clever as he could be, and so sharp
and sensible that all the neighbours marvelled over the wise things he
said and did.

When the Hazel-nut child was fifteen years old, and was sitting one day
in an egg-shell on the table beside his mother, she turned to him and
said, ‘You are now fifteen years old, and nothing can be done with you.
What do you intend to be?’

‘A messenger,’ answered the Hazel-nut child.

Then his mother burst out laughing and said, ‘What an idea! You a
messenger! Why, your little feet would take an hour to go the distance
an ordinary person could do in a minute!’

But the Hazel-nut child replied, ‘Nevertheless I mean to be a messenger!
Just send me a message and you’ll see that I shall be back in next to no
time.’

So his mother said, ‘Very well, go to your aunt in the neighbouring
village, and fetch me a comb.’ The Hazel-nut child jumped quickly out
of the egg-shell and ran out into the street. Here he found a man on
horseback who was just setting out for the neighbouring village. He
crept up the horse’s leg, sat down under the saddle, and then began to
pinch the horse and to prick it with a pin. The horse plunged and reared
and then set off at a hard gallop, which it continued in spite of its
rider’s efforts to stop it. When they reached the village, the Hazel-nut
child left off pricking the horse, and the poor tired creature pursued
its way at a snail’s pace. The Hazel-nut child took advantage of this,
and crept down the horse’s leg; then he ran to his aunt and asked her
for a comb. On the way home he met another rider, and did the return
journey in exactly the same way. When he handed his mother the comb that
his aunt had given him, she was much amazed and asked him, ‘But how did
you manage to get back so quickly?’

‘Ah! mother,’ he replied, ‘you see I was quite right when I said I knew
a messenger was the profession for me.’

His father too possessed a horse which he often used to take out into
the fields to graze. One day he took the Hazel-nut child with him. At
midday the father turned to his small son and said, ‘Stay here and look
after the horse. I must go home and give your mother a message, but I
shall be back soon.’

When his father had gone, a robber passed by and saw the horse grazing
without any one watching it, for of course he could not see the
Hazel-nut child hidden in the grass. So he mounted the horse and rode
away. But the Hazel-nut child, who was the most active little creature,
climbed up the horse’s tail and began to bite it on the back, enraging
the creature to such an extent that it paid no attention to the
direction the robber tried to make it go in, but galloped straight home.
The father was much astonished when he saw a stranger riding his horse,
but the Hazel-nut child climbed down quickly and told him all that had
happened, and his father had the robber arrested at once and put into
prison.

One autumn when the Hazel-nut child was twenty years old he said to his
parents: ‘Farewell, my dear father and mother. I am going to set out
into the world, and as soon as I have become rich I will return home to
you.’

The parents laughed at the little man’s words, but did not believe him
for a moment. In the evening the Hazel-nut child crept on to the roof,
where some storks had built their nest. The storks were fast asleep,
and he climbed on to the back of the father-stork and bound a silk cord
round the joint of one of its wings, then he crept among its soft downy
feathers and fell asleep.

The next morning the storks flew towards the south, for winter was
approaching. The Hazel-nut child flew through the air on the stork’s
back, and when he wanted to rest he bound his silk cord on to the joint
of the bird’s other wing, so that it could not fly any farther. In this
way he reached the country of the black people, where the storks took
up their abode close to the capital. When the people saw the Hazel-nut
child they were much astonished, and took him with the stork to the King
of the country. The King was delighted with the little creature and kept
him always beside him, and he soon grew so fond of the little man that
he gave him a diamond four times as big as himself. The Hazel-nut child
fastened the diamond firmly under the stork’s neck with a ribbon, and
when he saw that the other storks were getting ready for their northern
flight, he untied the silk cord from his stork’s wings, and away they
went, getting nearer home every minute. At length the Hazel-nut child
came to his native village; then he undid the ribbon from the stork’s
neck and the diamond fell to the ground; he covered it first with sand
and stones, and then ran to get his parents, so that they might carry
the treasure home, for he himself was not able to lift the great
diamond.

So the Hazel-nut child and his parents lived in happiness and prosperity
after this till they died.




THE STORY OF BIG KLAUS AND LITTLE KLAUS

In a certain village there lived two people who had both the same name.
Both were called Klaus, but one owned four horses and the other only
one. In order to distinguish the one from the other, the one who had
four horses was called Big Klaus, and the one who had only one horse,
Little Klaus. Now you shall hear what befell them both, for this is a
true story.

The whole week through Little Klaus had to plough for Big Klaus, and
lend him his one horse; then Big Klaus lent him his four horses, but
only once a week, and that was on Sunday. Hurrah! how loudly Little
Klaus cracked his whip over all the five horses! for they were indeed as
good as his on this one day. The sun shone brightly, and all the bells
in the church-towers were pealing; the people were dressed in their best
clothes, and were going to church, with their hymn books under their
arms, to hear the minister preach. They saw Little Klaus ploughing with
the five horses; but he was so happy that he kept on cracking his whip,
and calling out ‘Gee-up, my five horses!’

‘You mustn’t say that,’ said Big Klaus. ‘Only one horse is yours.’

But as soon as someone else was going by Little Klaus forgot that he
must not say it, and called out ‘Gee-up, my five horses!’

‘Now you had better stop that,’ said Big Klaus, ‘for if you say it once
more I will give your horse such a crack on the head that it will drop
down dead on the spot!’

‘I really won’t say it again!’ said Little Klaus. But as soon as more
people passed by, and nodded him good-morning, he became so happy in
thinking how well it looked to have five horses ploughing his field
that, cracking his whip, he called out ‘Gee-up, my five horses!’

‘I’ll see to your horses!’ said Big Klaus; and, seizing an iron bar, he
struck Little Klaus’ one horse such a blow on the head that it fell down
and died on the spot.

‘Alas! Now I have no horse!’ said Little Klaus, beginning to cry. Then
he flayed the skin off his horse, dried it, and put it in a sack, which
he threw over his shoulder, and went into the town to sell it. He had a
long way to go, and had to pass through a great dark forest. A dreadful
storm came on, in which he lost his way, and before he could get on to
the right road night came on, and it was impossible to reach the town
that evening.

Right in front of him was a large farm-house. The window-shutters were
closed, but the light came through the chinks. ‘I should very much like
to be allowed to spend the night there,’ thought Little Klaus; and he
went and knocked at the door. The farmer’s wife opened it, but when she
heard what he wanted she told him to go away; her husband was not at
home, and she took in no strangers.

‘Well, I must lie down outside,’ said Little Klaus; and the farmer’s
wife shut the door in his face. Close by stood a large haystack,
and between it and the house a little out-house, covered with a flat
thatched roof.

‘I can lie down there,’ thought Little Klaus, looking at the roof; ‘it
will make a splendid bed, if only the stork won’t fly down and bite my
legs.’ For a live stork was standing on the roof, where it had its nest.
So Little Klaus crept up into the out-house, where he lay down, and made
himself comfortable for the night. The wooden shutters over the windows
were not shut at the top, and he could just see into the room.

There stood a large table, spread with wine and roast meat and a
beautiful fish. The farmer’s wife and the sexton sat at the table, but
there was no one else. She was filling up his glass, while he stuck his
fork into the fish which was his favourite dish.

‘If one could only get some of that!’ thought Little Klaus, stretching
his head towards the window. Ah, what delicious cakes he saw standing
there! It WAS a feast!

Then he heard someone riding along the road towards the house. It was
the farmer coming home. He was a very worthy man; but he had one great
peculiarity--namely, that he could not bear to see a sexton. If he
saw one he was made quite mad. That was why the sexton had gone to say
good-day to the farmer’s wife when he knew that her husband was not at
home, and the good woman therefore put in front of him the best food she
had. But when they heard the farmer coming they were frightened, and the
farmer’s wife begged the sexton to creep into a great empty chest. He
did so, as he knew the poor man could not bear to see a sexton. The wife
hastily hid all the beautiful food and the wine in her oven; for if her
husband had seen it, he would have been sure to ask what it all meant.

‘Oh, dear! oh, dear!’ groaned Little Klaus up in the shed, when he saw
the good food disappearing.

‘Is anybody up there?’ asked the farmer, catching sight of Little Klaus.
‘Why are you lying there? Come with me into the house.’

Then Little Klaus told him how he had lost his way, and begged to be
allowed to spend the night there.

‘Yes, certainly,’ said the farmer; ‘but we must first have something to
eat!’

The wife received them both very kindly, spread a long table, and gave
them a large plate of porridge. The farmer was hungry, and ate with a
good appetite; but Little Klaus could not help thinking of the delicious
dishes of fish and roast meats and cakes which he knew were in the oven.
Under the table at his feet he had laid the sack with the horse-skin in
it, for, as we know, he was going to the town to sell it. The porridge
did not taste good to him, so he trod upon his sack, and the dry skin in
the sack squeaked loudly.

‘Hush!’ said Little Klaus to his sack, at the same time treading on it
again so that it squeaked even louder than before.

‘Hallo! what have you got in your sack?’ asked the farmer.

‘Oh, it is a wizard!’ said Little Klaus. ‘He says we should not eat
porridge, for he has conjured the whole oven full of roast meats and
fish and cakes.’

‘Goodness me!’ said the farmer; and opening the oven he saw all the
delicious, tempting dishes his wife had hidden there, but which he now
believed the wizard in the sack had conjured up for them. The wife could
say nothing, but she put the food at once on the table, and they ate the
fish, the roast meat, and the cakes. Little Klaus now trod again on his
sack, so that the skin squeaked.

‘What does he say now?’ asked the farmer.

‘He says,’ replied Little Klans, ‘that he has also conjured up for us
three bottles of wine; they are standing in the corner by the oven!’

The wife had to fetch the wine which she had hidden, and the farmer
drank and grew very merry. He would very much like to have had such a
wizard as Little Klaus had in the sack.

‘Can he conjure up the Devil?’ asked the farmer. ‘I should like to see
him very much, for I feel just now in very good spirits!’

‘Yes,’ said Little Klaus; ‘my wizard can do everything that I ask. Isn’t
that true?’ he asked, treading on the sack so that it squeaked. ‘Do you
hear? He says ‘’Yes;’’ but that the Devil looks so ugly that we should
not like to see him.’

‘Oh! I’m not at all afraid. What does he look like?’

‘He will show himself in the shape of a sexton!’

‘I say!’ said the farmer, ‘he must be ugly! You must know that I can’t
bear to look at a sexton! But it doesn’t matter. I know that it is the
Devil, and I sha’n’t mind! I feel up to it now. But he must not come too
near me!’

‘I must ask my wizard,’ said Little Klaus, treading on the sack and
putting his ear to it.

‘What does he say?’

‘He says you can open the chest in the corner there, and you will see
the Devil squatting inside it; but you must hold the lid so that he
shall not escape.’

‘Will you help me to hold him?’ begged the farmer, going towards the
chest where his wife had hidden the real sexton, who was sitting inside
in a terrible fright. The farmer opened the lid a little way, and saw
him inside.

‘Ugh!’ he shrieked, springing back. ‘Yes, now I have seen him; he looked
just like our sexton. Oh, it was horrid!’

So he had to drink again, and they drank till far on into the night.

‘You MUST sell me the wizard,’ said the farmer. ‘Ask anything you like!
I will pay you down a bushelful of money on the spot.’

‘No, I really can’t,’ said Little Klans. ‘Just think how many things I
can get from this wizard!’

‘Ah! I should like to have him so much!’ said the farmer, begging very
hard.

‘Well!’ said Little Klaus at last, ‘as you have been so good as to give
me shelter to-night, I will sell him. You shall have the wizard for a
bushel of money, but I must have full measure.’

‘That you shall,’ said the farmer. ‘But you must take the chest with
you. I won’t keep it another hour in the house. Who knows that he isn’t
in there still?’

Little Klaus gave the farmer his sack with the dry skin, and got instead
a good bushelful of money. The farmer also gave him a wheelbarrow to
carry away his money and the chest. ‘Farewell,’ said Little Klaus; and
away he went with his money and the big chest, wherein sat the sexton.

On the other side of the wood was a large deep river. The water flowed
so rapidly that you could scarcely swim against the stream.

A great new bridge had been built over it, on the middle of which Little
Klaus stopped, and said aloud so that the sexton might hear:

‘Now, what am I to do with this stupid chest? It is as heavy as if it
were filled with stones! I shall only be tired, dragging it along; I
will throw it into the river. If it swims home to me, well and good; and
if it doesn’t, it’s no matter.’

Then he took the chest with one hand and lifted it up a little, as if he
were going to throw it into the water.

‘No, don’t do that!’ called out the sexton in the chest. ‘Let me get out
first!’

‘Oh, oh!’ said Little Klaus, pretending that he was afraid. ‘He is still
in there! I must throw him quickly into the water to drown him!’

‘Oh! no, no!’ cried the sexton. ‘I will give you a whole bushelful of
money if you will let me go!’

‘Ah, that’s quite another thing!’ said Little Klaus, opening the chest.
The sexton crept out very quickly, pushed the empty chest into the water
and went to his house, where he gave Little Klaus a bushel of money. One
he had had already from the farmer, and now he had his wheelbarrow full
of money.

‘Well, I have got a good price for the horse!’ said he to himself when
he shook all his money out in a heap in his room. ‘This will put Big
Klaus in a rage when he hears how rich I have become through my one
horse; but I won’t tell him just yet!’

So he sent a boy to Big Klaus to borrow a bushel measure from him.

‘Now what can he want with it?’ thought Big Klaus; and he smeared some
tar at the bottom, so that of whatever was measured a little should
remain in it. And this is just what happened; for when he got his
measure back, three new silver five-shilling pieces were sticking to it.

What does this mean?’ said Big Klaus, and he ran off at once to Little
Klaus.

‘Where did you get so much money from?’

‘Oh, that was from my horse-skin. I sold it yesterday evening.’

‘That’s certainly a good price!’ said Big Klaus; and running home in
great haste, he took an axe, knocked all his four horses on the head,
skinned them, and went into the town.

‘Skins! skins! Who will buy skins?’ he cried through the streets.

All the shoemakers and tanners came running to ask him what he wanted
for them. ‘A bushel of money for each,’ said Big Klaus.

‘Are you mad?’ they all exclaimed. ‘Do you think we have money by the
bushel?’

‘Skins! skins! Who will buy skins?’ he cried again, and to all who asked
him what they cost, he answered, ‘A bushel of money.’

‘He is making game of us,’ they said; and the shoemakers seized their
yard measures and the tanners their leathern aprons and they gave Big
Klaus a good beating. ‘Skins! skins!’ they cried mockingly; yes, we will
tan YOUR skin for you! Out of the town with him!’ they shouted; and Big
Klaus had to hurry off as quickly as he could, if he wanted to save his
life.

‘Aha!’ said he when he came home, ‘Little Klaus shall pay dearly for
this. I will kill him!’

Little Klaus’ grandmother had just died. Though she had been very unkind
to him, he was very much distressed, and he took the dead woman and laid
her in his warm bed to try if he could not bring her back to life.
There she lay the whole night, while he sat in the corner and slept on a
chair, which he had often done before. And in the night as he sat there
the door opened, and Big Klaus came in with his axe. He knew quite
well where Little Klaus’s bed stood, and going up to it he struck the
grandmother on the head just where he thought Little Klaus would be.
‘There!’ said he. ‘Now you won’t get the best of me again!’ And he went
home.

‘What a very wicked man!’ thought Little Klaus. ‘He was going to kill
me! It was a good thing for my grandmother that she was dead already, or
else he would have killed her!’

Then he dressed his grandmother in her Sunday clothes, borrowed a horse
from his neighbour, harnessed the cart to it, sat his grandmother on the
back seat so that she could not fall out when he drove, and away they
went. When the sun rose they were in front of a large inn. Little Klaus
got down, and went in to get something to drink. The host was very rich.
He was a very worthy but hot-tempered man.

‘Good morning!’ said he to Little Klaus. ‘You are early on the road.’

‘Yes,’ said Little Klaus. ‘I am going to the town with my grandmother.
She is sitting outside in the cart; I cannot bring her in. Will you not
give her a glass of mead? But you will have to speak loud, for she is
very hard of hearing.’

‘Oh yes, certainly I will!’ said the host; and, pouring out a large
glass of mead, he took it out to the dead grandmother, who was sitting
upright in the cart.

‘Here is a glass of mead from your son,’ said the host. But the dead
woman did not answer a word, and sat still. ‘Don’t you hear?’ cried the
host as loud as he could. ‘Here is a glass of mead from your son!’

Then he shouted the same thing again, and yet again, but she never moved
in her place; and at last he grew angry, threw the glass in her face, so
that she fell back into the cart, for she was not tied in her place.

‘Hullo!’ cried Little Klaus, running out of the door, and seizing the
host by the throat. ‘You have killed my grandmother! Look! there is a
great hole in her forehead!’

‘Oh, what a misfortune!’ cried the host, wringing his hands. ‘It all
comes from my hot temper! Dear Little Klaus! I will give you a bushel of
money, and will bury your grandmother as if she were my own; only don’t
tell about it, or I shall have my head cut off, and that would be very
uncomfortable.’

So Little Klaus got a bushel of money, and the host buried his
grandmother as if she had been his own.

Now when Little Klaus again reached home with so much money he sent his
boy to Big Klaus to borrow his bushel measure.

‘What’s this?’ said Big Klaus. ‘Didn’t I kill him? I must see to this
myself!’

So he went himself to Little Klaus with the measure.

‘Well, now, where did you get all this money?’ asked he, opening his
eyes at the heap.

‘You killed my grandmother--not me,’ said Little Klaus. ‘I sold her, and
got a bushel of money for her.’

‘That is indeed a good price!’ said Big Klaus; and, hurrying home, he
took an axe and killed his grandmother, laid her in the cart, and drove
off to the apothecary’s, and asked whether he wanted to buy a dead body.

‘Who is it, and how did you get it?’ asked the apothecary.

‘It is my grandmother,’ said Big Klaus. ‘I killed her in order to get a
bushel of money.’

‘You are mad!’ said the apothecary. ‘Don’t mention such things, or you
will lose your head!’ And he began to tell him what a dreadful thing
he had done, and what a wicked man he was, and that he ought to be
punished; till Big Klaus was so frightened that he jumped into the cart
and drove home as hard as he could. The apothecary and all the people
thought he must be mad, so they let him go.

‘You shall pay for this!’ said Big Klaus as he drove home. ‘You shall
pay for this dearly, Little Klaus!’

So as soon as he got home he took the largest sack he could find, and
went to Little Klaus and said: ‘You have fooled me again! First I killed
my horses, then my grandmother! It is all your fault; but you sha’n’t do
it again!’ And he seized Little Klaus, pushed him in the sack, threw it
over his shoulder, crying out ‘Now I am going to drown you!’

He had to go a long way before he came to the river, and Little Klaus
was not very light. The road passed by the church; the organ was
sounding, and the people were singing most beautifully.

Big Klaus put down the sack with Little Klaus in it by the church-door,
and thought that he might as well go in and hear a psalm before going on
farther. Little Klaus could not get out, and everybody was in church; so
he went in.

‘Oh, dear! oh, dear!’ groaned Little Klaus in the sack, twisting and
turning himself. But he could not undo the string.

There came by an old, old shepherd, with snow-white hair and a long
staff in his hand. He was driving a herd of cows and oxen. These pushed
against the sack so that it was overturned.

‘Alas!’ moaned Little Klans, ‘I am so young and yet I must die!’

‘And I, poor man,’ said the cattle-driver, ‘I am so old and yet I cannot
die!’

‘Open the sack,’ called out Little Klaus; ‘creep in here instead of me,
and you will die in a moment!’

‘I will gladly do that,’ said the cattle-driver; and he opened the sack,
and Little Klaus struggled out at once.

‘You will take care of the cattle, won’t you?’ asked the old man,
creeping into the sack, which Little Klaus fastened up and then went on
with the cows and oxen. Soon after Big Klaus came out of the church, and
taking up the sack on his shoulders it seemed to him as if it had become
lighter; for the old cattle-driver was not half as heavy as Little
Klaus.

‘How easy he is to carry now! That must be because I heard part of the
service.’

So he went to the river, which was deep and broad, threw in the sack
with the old driver, and called after it, for he thought Little Klaus
was inside:

‘Down you go! You won’t mock me any more now!’

Then he went home; but when he came to the cross-roads, there he met
Little Klaus, who was driving his cattle.

‘What’s this?’ said Big Klaus. ‘Haven’t I drowned you?’

‘Yes,’ replied Little Klaus; ‘you threw me into the river a good
half-hour ago!’

‘But how did you get those splendid cattle?’ asked Big Klaus.

‘They are sea-cattle!’ said Little Klaus. ‘I will tell you the whole
story, and I thank you for having drowned me, because now I am on dry
land and really rich! How frightened I was when I was in the sack! How
the wind whistled in my ears as you threw me from the bridge into the
cold water! I sank at once to the bottom; but I did not hurt myself for
underneath was growing the most beautiful soft grass. I fell on this,
and immediately the sack opened; the loveliest maiden in snow-white
garments, with a green garland round her wet hair, took me by the hand,
and said! ‘’Are you Little Klaus? Here are some cattle for you to begin
with, and a mile farther down the road there is another herd, which
I will give you as a present!’’ Now I saw that the river was a great
high-road for the sea-people. Along it they travel underneath from
the sea to the land till the river ends. It was so beautiful, full of
flowers and fresh grass; the fishes which were swimming in the water
shot past my ears as the birds do here in the air. What lovely people
there were, and what fine cattle were grazing in the ditches and dykes!’

‘But why did you come up to us again?’ asked Big Klaus. ‘I should not
have done so, if it is so beautiful down below!’

‘Oh!’ said Little Klaus, ‘that was just so politic of me. You heard
what I told you, that the sea-maiden said to me a mile farther along the
road--and by the road she meant the river, for she can go by no other
way--there was another herd of cattle waiting for me. But I know what
windings the river makes, now here, now there, so that it is a long way
round. Therefore it makes it much shorter if one comes on the land and
drives across the field to the river. Thus I have spared myself quite
half a mile, and have come much quicker to my sea-cattle!’

‘Oh, you’re a lucky fellow!’ said Big Klaus. ‘Do you think I should also
get some cattle if I went to the bottom of the river?’

‘Oh, yes! I think so,’ said Little Klaus. ‘But I can’t carry you in a
sack to the river; you are too heavy for me! If you like to go there
yourself and then creep into the sack, I will throw you in with the
greatest of pleasure.’

‘Thank you,’ said Big Klaus; ‘but if I don’t get any sea-cattle when I
come there, you will have a good hiding, mind!’

‘Oh, no! Don’t be so hard on me!’ Then they went to the river. When
the cattle, which were thirsty, caught sight of the water, they ran as
quickly as they could to drink.

‘Look how they are running!’ said Little Klaus. ‘They want to go to the
bottom again!’

‘Yes; but help me first,’ said Big Klaus, ‘or else you shall have a
beating!’

And so he crept into the large sack, which was lying on the back of
one of the oxen. ‘Put a stone in, for I am afraid I may not reach the
bottom,’ said Big Klaus.

‘It goes all right!’ said Little Klaus; but still he laid a big stone in
the sack, fastened it up tight, and then pushed it in. Plump! there was
Big Klaus in the water, and he sank like lead to the bottom.

‘I doubt if he will find any cattle!’ said Little Klaus as he drove his
own home.




PRINCE RING (30)

(30) From the Icelandic.

Once upon a time there was a King and his Queen in their kingdom.

They had one daughter, who was called Ingiborg, and one son, whose name
was Ring. He was less fond of adventures than men of rank usually were
in those days, and was not famous for strength or feats of arms. When he
was twelve years old, one fine winter day he rode into the forest along
with his men to enjoy himself. They went on a long way, until they
caught sight of a hind with a gold ring on its horns. The Prince was
eager to catch it, if possible, so they gave chase and rode on without
stopping until all the horses began to founder beneath them. At last the
Prince’s horse gave way too, and then there came over them a darkness so
black that they could no longer see the hind. By this time they were far
away from any house, and thought it was high time to be making their way
home again, but they found they had got lost now. At first they all kept
together, but soon each began to think that he knew the right way best;
so they separated, and all went in different directions.

The Prince, too, had got lost like the rest, and wandered on for a time
until he came to a little clearing in the forest not far from the sea,
where he saw a woman sitting on a chair and a big barrel standing
beside her. The Prince went up to her and saluted her politely, and she
received him very graciously. He looked down into the barrel then, and
saw lying at the bottom an unusually beautiful gold ring, which pleased
him so much that he could not take his eyes off it. The woman saw this,
and said that he might have it if he would take the trouble to get it;
for which the Prince thanked her, and said it was at least worth trying.
So he leaned over into the barrel, which did not seem very deep, and
thought he would easily reach the ring; but the more he stretched down
after it the deeper grew the barrel. As he was thus bending down into it
the woman suddenly rose up and pushed him in head first, saying that
now he could take up his quarters there. Then she fixed the top on the
barrel and threw it out into the sea.

The Prince thought himself in a bad plight now, as he felt the barrel
floating out from the land and tossing about on the waves.

How many days he spent thus he could not tell, but at last he felt that
the barrel was knocking against rocks, at which he was a little cheered,
thinking it was probably land and not merely a reef in the sea. Being
something of a swimmer, he at last made up his mind to kick the bottom
out of the barrel, and having done so he was able to get on shore, for
the rocks by the sea were smooth and level; but overhead there were high
cliffs. It seemed difficult to get up these, but he went along the foot
of them for a little, till at last he tried to climb up, which at last
he did.

Having got to the top, he looked round about him and saw that he was
on an island, which was covered with forest, with apples growing, and
altogether pleasant as far as the land was concerned. After he had been
there several days, he one day heard a great noise in the forest, which
made him terribly afraid, so that he ran to hide himself among the
trees. Then he saw a Giant approaching, dragging a sledge loaded with
wood, and making straight for him, so that he could see nothing for it
but to lie down just where he was. When the Giant came across him, he
stood still and looked at the Prince for a little; then he took him up
in his arms and carried him home to his house, and was exceedingly kind
to him. He gave him to his wife, saying he had found this child in the
wood, and she could have it to help her in the house. The old woman was
greatly pleased, and began to fondle the Prince with the utmost delight.
He stayed there with them, and was very willing and obedient to them in
everything, while they grew kinder to him every day.

One day the Giant took him round and showed him all his rooms except the
parlour; this made the Prince curious to have a look into it, thinking
there must be some very rare treasure there. So one day, when the Giant
had gone into the forest, he tried to get into the parlour, and managed
to get the door open half-way. Then he saw that some living creature
moved inside and ran along the floor towards him and said something,
which made him so frightened that he sprang back from the door and shut
it again. As soon as the fright began to pass off he tried it again, for
he thought it would be interesting to hear what it said; but things went
just as before with him. He then got angry with himself, and, summoning
up all his courage, tried it a third time, and opened the door of the
room and stood firm. Then he saw that it was a big Dog, which spoke to
him and said:

‘Choose me, Prince Ring.’

The Prince went away rather afraid, thinking with himself that it was no
great treasure after all; but all the same what it had said to him stuck
in his mind.

It is not said how long the Prince stayed with the Giant, but one
day the latter came to him and said he would now take him over to the
mainland out of the island, for he himself had no long time to live. He
also thanked him for his good service, and told him to choose some-one
of his possessions, for he would get whatever he wanted. Ring thanked
him heartily, and said there was no need to pay him for his services,
they were so little worth; but if he did wish to give him anything he
would choose what was in the parlour. The Giant was taken by surprise,
and said:

‘There, you chose my old woman’s right hand; but I must not break my
word.’

Upon this he went to get the Dog, which came running with signs of great
delight; but the Prince was so much afraid of it that it was all he
could do to keep from showing his alarm.

After this the Giant accompanied him down to the sea, where he saw a
stone boat which was just big enough to hold the two of them and the
Dog. On reaching the mainland the Giant took a friendly farewell of
Ring, and told him he might take possession of all that was in the
island after he and his wife died, which would happen within two weeks
from that time. The Prince thanked him for this and for all his other
kindnesses, and the Giant returned home, while Ring went up some
distance from the sea; but he did not know what land he had come to, and
was afraid to speak to the Dog. After he had walked on in silence for a
time the Dog spoke to him and said:

‘You don’t seem to have much curiosity, seeing you never ask my name.’

The Prince then forced himself to ask, ‘What is your name?’

‘You had best call me Snati-Snati,’ said the Dog. ‘Now we are coming to
a King’s seat, and you must ask the King to keep us all winter, and to
give you a little room for both of us.’

The Prince now began to be less afraid of the Dog. They came to the King
and asked him to keep them all the winter, to which he agreed. When the
King’s men saw the Dog they began to laugh at it, and make as if they
would tease it; but when the Prince saw this he advised them not to do
it, or they might have the worst of it. They replied that they didn’t
care a bit what he thought.

After Ring had been with the King for some days the latter began to
think there was a great deal in him, and esteemed him more than the
others. The King, however, had a counsellor called Red, who became very
jealous when he saw how much the King esteemed Ring; and one day he
talked to him, and said he could not understand why he had so good an
opinion of this stranger, who had not yet shown himself superior to
other men in anything. The King replied that it was only a short time
since he had come there. Red then asked him to send them both to cut
down wood next morning, and see which of them could do most work.
Snati-Snati heard this and told it to Ring, advising him to ask the King
for two axes, so that he might have one in reserve if the first one
got broken. Next morning the King asked Ring and Red to go and cut down
trees for him, and both agreed. Ring got the two axes, and each went his
own way; but when the Prince had got out into the wood Snati took one of
the axes and began to hew along with him. In the evening the King came
to look over their day’s work, as Red had proposed, and found that
Ring’s wood-heap was more than twice as big.

‘I suspected,’ said the King, ‘that Ring was not quite useless; never
have I seen such a day’s work.’

Ring was now in far greater esteem with the King than before, and Red
was all the more discontented. One day he came to the King and said, ‘If
Ring is such a mighty man, I think you might ask him to kill the wild
oxen in the wood here, and flay them the same day, and bring you the
horns and the hides in the evening.’

‘Don’t you think that a desperate errand?’ said the King, ‘seeing they
are so dangerous, and no one has ever yet ventured to go against them?’

Red answered that he had only one life to lose, and it would be
interesting to see how brave he was; besides, the King would have good
reason to ennoble him if he overcame them. The King at last allowed
himself, though rather unwillingly, to be won over by Red’s persistency,
and one day asked Ring to go and kill the oxen that were in the wood for
him, and bring their horns and hides to him in the evening. Not knowing
how dangerous the oxen were, Ring was quite ready, and went off at once,
to the great delight of Red, who was now sure of his death.

As soon as Ring came in sight of the oxen they came bellowing to meet
him; one of them was tremendously big, the other rather less. Ring grew
terribly afraid.

‘How do you like them?’ asked Snati.

‘Not well at all,’ said the Prince.

‘We can do nothing else,’ said Snati, ‘than attack them, if it is to go
well; you will go against the little one, and I shall take the other.’

With this Snati leapt at the big one, and was not long in bringing
him down. Meanwhile the Prince went against the other with fear and
trembling, and by the time Snati came to help him the ox had nearly got
him under, but Snati was not slow in helping his master to kill it.

Each of them then began to flay their own ox, but Ring was only half
through by the time Snati had finished his. In the evening, after they
had finished this task, the Prince thought himself unfit to carry all
the horns and both the hides, so Snati told him to lay them all on his
back until they got to the Palace gate.

The Prince agreed, and laid everything on the Dog except the skin of the
smaller ox, which he staggered along with himself. At the Palace gate he
left everything lying, went before the King, and asked him to come that
length with him, and there handed over to him the hides and horns of the
oxen. The King was greatly surprised at his valour, and said he knew no
one like him, and thanked him heartily for what he had done.

After this the King set Ring next to himself, and all esteemed him
highly, and held him to be a great hero; nor could Red any longer say
anything against him, though he grew still more determined to destroy
him. One day a good idea came into his head. He came to the King and
said he had something to say to him.

‘What is that?’ said the King.

Red said that he had just remembered the gold cloak, gold chess-board,
and bright gold piece that the King had lost about a year before.

‘Don’t remind me of them!’ said the King.

Red, however, went on to say that, since Ring was such a mighty man that
he could do everything, it had occurred to him to advise the King to
ask him to search for these treasures, and come back with them before
Christmas; in return the King should promise him his daughter.

The King replied that he thought it altogether unbecoming to propose
such a thing to Ring, seeing that he could not tell him where the things
were; but Red pretended not to hear the King’s excuses, and went on
talking about it until the King gave in to him. One day, a month or so
before Christmas, the King spoke to Ring, saying that he wished to ask a
great favour of him.

‘What is that?’ said Ring.

‘It is this,’ said the King: ‘that you find for me my gold cloak, my
gold chess-board, and my bright gold piece, that were stolen from me
about a year ago. If you can bring them to me before Christmas I will
give you my daughter in marriage.’

‘Where am I to look for them, then?’ said Ring.

‘That you must find out for yourself,’ said the King: ‘I don’t know.’

Ring now left the King, and was very silent, for he saw he was in a
great difficulty: but, on the other hand, he thought it was excellent
to have such a chance of winning the King’s daughter. Snati noticed that
his master was at a loss, and said to him that he should not disregard
what the King had asked him to do; but he would have to act upon his
advice, otherwise he would get into great difficulties. The Prince
assented to this, and began to prepare for the journey.

After he had taken leave of the King, and was setting out on the
search, Snati said to him, ‘Now you must first of all go about the
neighbourhood, and gather as much salt as ever you can.’ The Prince did
so, and gathered so much salt that he could hardly carry it; but Snati
said, ‘Throw it on my back,’ which he accordingly did, and the Dog then
ran on before the Prince, until they came to the foot of a steep cliff.

‘We must go up here,’ said Snati.

‘I don’t think that will be child’s play,’ said the Prince.

‘Hold fast by my tail,’ said Snati; and in this way he pulled Ring up on
the lowest shelf of the rock. The Prince began to get giddy, but up went
Snati on to the second shelf. Ring was nearly swooning by this time, but
Snati made a third effort and reached the top of the cliff, where the
Prince fell down in a faint. After a little, however, he recovered
again, and they went a short distance along a level plain, until they
came to a cave. This was on Christmas Eve. They went up above the cave,
and found a window in it, through which they looked, and saw four
trolls lying asleep beside the fire, over which a large porridge-pot was
hanging.

‘Now you must empty all the salt into the porridge-pot,’ said Snati.

Ring did so, and soon the trolls wakened up. The old hag, who was the
most frightful of them all, went first to taste the porridge.

‘How comes this?’ she said; ‘the porridge is salt! I got the milk by
witchcraft yesterday out of four kingdoms, and now it is salt!’

All the others then came to taste the porridge, and thought it nice, but
after they had finished it the old hag grew so thirsty that she could
stand it no longer, and asked her daughter to go out and bring her some
water from the river that ran near by.

‘I won’t go,’ said she, ‘unless you lend me your bright gold piece.’

‘Though I should die you shan’t have that,’ said the hag.

‘Die, then,’ said the girl.

‘Well, then, take it, you brat,’ said the old hag, ‘and be off with you,
and make haste with the water.’

The girl took the gold and ran out with it, and it was so bright that it
shone all over the plain. As soon as she came to the river she lay down
to take a drink of the water, but meanwhile the two of them had got down
off the roof and thrust her, head first, into the river.

The old hag began now to long for the water, and said that the girl
would be running about with the gold piece all over the plain, so she
asked her son to go and get her a drop of water.

‘I won’t go,’ said he, ‘unless I get the gold cloak.’

‘Though I should die you shan’t have that,’ said the hag.

‘Die, then,’ said the son.

‘Well, then, take it,’ said the old hag, ‘and be off with you, but you
must make haste with the water.’

He put on the cloak, and when he came outside it shone so bright that he
could see to go with it. On reaching the river he went to take a drink
like his sister, but at that moment Ring and Snati sprang upon him, took
the cloak from him, and threw him into the river.

The old hag could stand the thirst no longer, and asked her husband
to go for a drink for her; the brats, she said, were of course running
about and playing themselves, just as she had expected they would,
little wretches that they were.

‘I won’t go,’ said the old troll, ‘unless you lend me the gold
chess-board.’

‘Though I should die you shan’t have that,’ said the hag.

‘I think you may just as well do that,’ said he, ‘since you won’t grant
me such a little favour.’

‘Take it, then, you utter disgrace!’ said the old hag, ‘since you are
just like these two brats.’

The old troll now went out with the gold chess-board, and down to the
river, and was about to take a drink, when Ring and Snati came upon him,
took the chess-board from him, and threw him into the river. Before they
had got back again, however, and up on top of the cave, they saw
the poor old fellow’s ghost come marching up from the river. Snati
immediately sprang upon him, and Ring assisted in the attack, and after
a hard struggle they mastered him a second time. When they got back
again to the window they saw that the old hag was moving towards the
door.

‘Now we must go in at once,’ said Snati, ‘and try to master her there,
for if she once gets out we shall have no chance with her. She is the
worst witch that ever lived, and no iron can cut her. One of us must
pour boiling porridge out of the pot on her, and the other punch her
with red-hot iron.’

In they went then, and no sooner did the hag see them than she said,
‘So you have come, Prince Ring; you must have seen to my husband and
children.’

Snati saw that she was about to attack them, and sprang at her with a
red-hot iron from the fire, while Ring kept pouring boiling porridge on
her without stopping, and in this way they at last got her killed. Then
they burned the old troll and her to ashes, and explored the cave, where
they found plenty of gold and treasures. The most valuable of these they
carried with them as far as the cliff, and left them there. Then they
hastened home to the King with his three treasures, where they arrived
late on Christmas night, and Ring handed them over to him.

The King was beside himself with joy, and was astonished at how clever
a man Ring was in all kinds of feats, so that he esteemed him still more
highly than before, and betrothed his daughter to him; and the feast
for this was to last all through Christmastide. Ring thanked the King
courteously for this and all his other kindnesses, and as soon as he had
finished eating and drinking in the hall went off to sleep in his own
room. Snati, however, asked permission to sleep in the Prince’s bed for
that night, while the Prince should sleep where the Dog usually lay.
Ring said he was welcome to do so, and that he deserved more from him
than that came to. So Snati went up into the Prince’s bed, but after a
time he came back, and told Ring he could go there himself now, but to
take care not to meddle with anything that was in the bed.

Now the story comes back to Red, who came into the hall and showed the
King his right arm wanting the hand, and said that now he could see what
kind of a man his intended son-in-law was, for he had done this to him
without any cause whatever. The King became very angry, and said he
would soon find out the truth about it, and if Ring had cut off his hand
without good cause he should be hanged; but if it was otherwise, then
Red should die. So the King sent for Ring and asked him for what reason
he had done this. Snati, however, had just told Ring what had happened
during the night, and in reply he asked the King to go with him and he
would show him something. The King went with him to his sleeping-room,
and saw lying on the bed a man’s hand holding a sword.

‘This hand,’ said Ring, ‘came over the partition during the night, and
was about to run me through in my bed, if I had not defended myself.’

The King answered that in that case he could not blame him for
protecting his own life, and that Red was well worthy of death. So Red
was hanged, and Ring married the King’s daughter.

The first night that they went to bed together Snati asked Ring to allow
him to lie at their feet, and this Ring allowed him to do. During the
night he heard a howling and outcry beside them, struck a light in a
hurry and saw an ugly dog’s skin lying near him, and a beautiful Prince
in the bed. Ring instantly took the skin and burned it, and then shook
the Prince, who was lying unconscious, until he woke up. The bridegroom
then asked his name; he replied that he was called Ring, and was a
King’s son. In his youth he had lost his mother, and in her place his
father had married a witch, who had laid a spell on him that he should
turn into a dog, and never be released from the spell unless a Prince
of the same name as himself allowed him to sleep at his feet the first
night after his marriage. He added further, ‘As soon as she knew that
you were my namesake she tried to get you destroyed, so that you
might not free me from the spell. She was the hind that you and your
companions chased; she was the woman that you found in the clearing with
the barrel, and the old hag that we just now killed in the cave.’

After the feasting was over the two namesakes, along with other men,
went to the cliff and brought all the treasure home to the Palace. Then
they went to the island and removed all that was valuable from it.
Ring gave to his namesake, whom he had freed from the spell, his sister
Ingiborg and his father’s kingdom to look after, but he himself stayed
with his father-in-law the King, and had half the kingdom while he lived
and the whole of it after his death.




THE SWINEHERD

There was once a poor Prince. He possessed a kingdom which, though
small, was yet large enough for him to marry on, and married he wished
to be.

Now it was certainly a little audacious of him to venture to say to the
Emperor’s daughter, ‘Will you marry me?’ But he did venture to say so,
for his name was known far and wide. There were hundreds of princesses
who would gladly have said ‘Yes,’ but would she say the same?

Well, we shall see.

On the grave of the Prince’s father grew a rose-tree, a very beautiful
rose-tree. It only bloomed every five years, and then bore but a single
rose, but oh, such a rose! Its scent was so sweet that when you smelt
it you forgot all your cares and troubles. And he had also a nightingale
which could sing as if all the beautiful melodies in the world were shut
up in its little throat. This rose and this nightingale the Princess was
to have, and so they were both put into silver caskets and sent to her.

The Emperor had them brought to him in the great hall, where
the Princess was playing ‘Here comes a duke a-riding’ with her
ladies-in-waiting. And when she caught sight of the big caskets which
contained the presents, she clapped her hands for joy.

‘If only it were a little pussy cat!’ she said. But the rose-tree with
the beautiful rose came out.

‘But how prettily it is made!’ said all the ladies-in-waiting.

‘It is more than pretty,’ said the Emperor, ‘it is charming!’

But the Princess felt it, and then she almost began to cry.

‘Ugh! Papa,’ she said, ‘it is not artificial, it is REAL!’

‘Ugh!’ said all the ladies-in-waiting, ‘it is real!’

‘Let us see first what is in the other casket before we begin to be
angry,’ thought the Emperor, and there came out the nightingale. It sang
so beautifully that one could scarcely utter a cross word against it.

‘Superbe! charmant!’ said the ladies-in-waiting, for they all chattered
French, each one worse than the other.

‘How much the bird reminds me of the musical snuff-box of the late
Empress!’ said an old courtier. ‘Ah, yes, it is the same tone, the same
execution!’

‘Yes,’ said the Emperor; and then he wept like a little child.

‘I hope that this, at least, is not real?’ asked the Princess.

‘Yes, it is a real bird,’ said those who had brought it.

‘Then let the bird fly away,’ said the Princess; and she would not on
any account allow the Prince to come.

‘But he was nothing daunted. He painted his face brown and black,
drew his cap well over his face, and knocked at the door. ‘Good-day,
Emperor,’ he said. ‘Can I get a place here as servant in the castle?’

‘Yes,’ said the Emperor, ‘but there are so many who ask for a place that
I don’t know whether there will be one for you; but, still, I will think
of you. Stay, it has just occurred to me that I want someone to look
after the swine, for I have so very many of them.’

And the Prince got the situation of Imperial Swineherd. He had a
wretched little room close to the pigsties; here he had to stay, but the
whole day he sat working, and when evening was come he had made a pretty
little pot. All round it were little bells, and when the pot boiled they
jingled most beautifully and played the old tune--

          ‘Where is Augustus dear?
          Alas!  he’s not here, here, here!’

But the most wonderful thing was, that when one held one’s finger in the
steam of the pot, then at once one could smell what dinner was ready in
any fire-place in the town. That was indeed something quite different
from the rose.

Now the Princess came walking past with all her ladies-in-waiting, and
when she heard the tune she stood still and her face beamed with joy,
for she also could play ‘Where is Augustus dear?’

It was the only tune she knew, but that she could play with one finger.

‘Why, that is what I play!’ she said. ‘He must be a most accomplished
Swineherd! Listen! Go down and ask him what the instrument costs.’

And one of the ladies-in-waiting had to go down; but she put on wooden
clogs. ‘What will you take for the pot?’ asked the lady-in-waiting.

‘I will have ten kisses from the Princess,’ answered the Swineherd.

‘Heaven forbid!’ said the lady-in-waiting.

‘Yes, I will sell it for nothing less,’ replied the Swineherd.

‘Well, what does he say?’ asked the Princess.

‘I really hardly like to tell you,’ answered the lady-in-waiting.

‘Oh, then you can whisper it to me.’

‘He is disobliging!’ said the Princess, and went away. But she had only
gone a few steps when the bells rang out so prettily--

          ‘Where is Augustus dear?
          Alas!  he’s not here, here, here.’

‘Listen!’ said the Princess. ‘Ask him whether he will take ten kisses
from my ladies-in-waiting.’

‘No, thank you,’ said the Swineherd. ‘Ten kisses from the Princess, or
else I keep my pot.’

‘That is very tiresome!’ said the Princess. ‘But you must put yourselves
in front of me, so that no one can see.’

And the ladies-in-waiting placed themselves in front and then spread out
their dresses; so the Swineherd got his ten kisses, and she got the pot.

What happiness that was! The whole night and the whole day the pot was
made to boil; there was not a fire-place in the whole town where they
did not know what was being cooked, whether it was at the chancellor’s
or at the shoemaker’s.

The ladies-in-waiting danced and clapped their hands.

‘We know who is going to have soup and pancakes; we know who is going to
have porridge and sausages--isn’t it interesting?’

‘Yes, very interesting!’ said the first lady-in-waiting.

‘But don’t say anything about it, for I am the Emperor’s daughter.’

‘Oh, no, of course we won’t!’ said everyone.

The Swineherd--that is to say, the Prince (though they did not know
he was anything but a true Swineherd)--let no day pass without making
something, and one day he made a rattle which, when it was turned round,
played all the waltzes, galops, and polkas which had ever been known
since the world began.

‘But that is superbe!’ said the Princess as she passed by. ‘I have never
heard a more beautiful composition. Listen! Go down and ask him what
this instrument costs; but I won’t kiss him again.’

‘He wants a hundred kisses from the Princess,’ said the lady-in-waiting
who had gone down to ask him.

‘I believe he is mad!’ said the Princess, and then she went on; but she
had only gone a few steps when she stopped.

‘One ought to encourage art,’ she said. ‘I am the Emperor’s daughter!
Tell him he shall have, as before, ten kisses; the rest he can take from
my ladies-in-waiting.’

‘But we don’t at all like being kissed by him,’ said the
ladies-in-waiting.

‘That’s nonsense,’ said the Princess; ‘and if I can kiss him, you can
too. Besides, remember that I give you board and lodging.’

So the ladies-in-waiting had to go down to him again.

‘A hundred kisses from the Princess,’ said he, ‘or each keeps his own.’

‘Put yourselves in front of us,’ she said then; and so all the
ladies-in-waiting put themselves in front, and he began to kiss the
Princess.

‘What can that commotion be by the pigsties?’ asked the Emperor, who was
standing on the balcony. He rubbed his eyes and put on his spectacles.
‘Why those are the ladies-in-waiting playing their games; I must go down
to them.’

So he took off his shoes, which were shoes though he had trodden them
down into slippers. What a hurry he was in, to be sure!

As soon as he came into the yard he walked very softly, and the
ladies-in-waiting were so busy counting the kisses and seeing fair play
that they never noticed the Emperor. He stood on tiptoe.

‘What is that?’ he said, when he saw the kissing; and then he threw
one of his slippers at their heads just as the Swineherd was taking his
eighty-sixth kiss.

‘Be off with you!’ said the Emperor, for he was very angry. And the
Princess and the Swineherd were driven out of the empire.

Then she stood still and wept; the Swineherd was scolding, and the rain
was streaming down.

‘Alas, what an unhappy creature I am!’ sobbed the Princess.

‘If only I had taken the beautiful Prince! Alas, how unfortunate I am!’

And the Swineherd went behind a tree, washed the black and brown off
his face, threw away his old clothes, and then stepped forward in his
splendid dress, looking so beautiful that the Princess was obliged to
courtesy.

‘I now come to this. I despise you!’ he said. ‘You would have nothing
to do with a noble Prince; you did not understand the rose or the
nightingale, but you could kiss the Swineherd for the sake of a toy.
This is what you get for it!’ And he went into his kingdom and shut the
door in her face, and she had to stay outside singing--

          ‘Where’s my Augustus dear?
          Alas!  he’s not here, here, here!




HOW TO TELL A TRUE PRINCESS

There was once upon a time a Prince who wanted to marry a Princess, but
she must be a true Princess. So he travelled through the whole world to
find one, but there was always something against each. There were plenty
of Princesses, but he could not find out if they were true Princesses.
In every case there was some little defect, which showed the genuine
article was not yet found. So he came home again in very low spirits,
for he had wanted very much to have a true Princess. One night there was
a dreadful storm; it thundered and lightened and the rain streamed down
in torrents. It was fearful! There was a knocking heard at the Palace
gate, and the old King went to open it.

There stood a Princess outside the gate; but oh, in what a sad plight
she was from the rain and the storm! The water was running down from
her hair and her dress into the points of her shoes and out at the heels
again. And yet she said she was a true Princess!

‘Well, we shall soon find that!’ thought the old Queen. But she said
nothing, and went into the sleeping-room, took off all the bed-clothes,
and laid a pea on the bottom of the bed. Then she put twenty mattresses
on top of the pea, and twenty eider-down quilts on the top of the
mattresses. And this was the bed in which the Princess was to sleep.

The next morning she was asked how she had slept.

‘Oh, very badly!’ said the Princess. ‘I scarcely closed my eyes all
night! I am sure I don’t know what was in the bed. I laid on something
so hard that my whole body is black and blue. It is dreadful!’

Now they perceived that she was a true Princess, because she had felt
the pea through the twenty mattresses and the twenty eider-down quilts.

No one but a true Princess could be so sensitive.

So the Prince married her, for now he knew that at last he had got hold
of a true Princess. And the pea was put into the Royal Museum, where it
is still to be seen if no one has stolen it. Now this is a true story.




THE BLUE MOUNTAINS

There were once a Scotsman and an Englishman and an Irishman serving in
the army together, who took it into their heads to run away on the first
opportunity they could get. The chance came and they took it. They
went on travelling for two days through a great forest, without food or
drink, and without coming across a single house, and every night they
had to climb up into the trees through fear of the wild beasts that were
in the wood. On the second morning the Scotsman saw from the top of his
tree a great castle far away. He said to himself that he would certainly
die if he stayed in the forest without anything to eat but the roots of
grass, which would not keep him alive very long. As soon, then, as he
got down out of the tree he set off towards the castle, without so much
as telling his companions that he had seen it at all; perhaps the hunger
and want they had suffered had changed their nature so much that the
one did not care what became of the other if he could save himself. He
travelled on most of the day, so that it was quite late when he reached
the castle, and to his great disappointment found nothing but closed
doors and no smoke rising from the chimneys. He thought there was
nothing for it but to die after all, and had lain down beside the wall,
when he heard a window being opened high above him. At this he looked
up, and saw the most beautiful woman he had ever set eyes on.

‘Oh, it is Fortune that has sent you to me,’ he said.

‘It is indeed,’ said she. ‘What are you in need of, or what has sent you
here?’

‘Necessity,’ said he. ‘I am dying for want of food and drink.’

‘Come inside, then,’ she said; ‘there is plenty of both here.’

Accordingly he went in to where she was, and she opened a large room for
him, where he saw a number of men lying asleep. She then set food before
him, and after that showed him to the room where the others were. He lay
down on one of the beds and fell sound asleep. And now we must go back
to the two that he left behind him in the wood.

When nightfall and the time of the wild beasts came upon these, the
Englishman happened to climb up into the very same tree on which the
Scotsman was when he got a sight of the castle; and as soon as the day
began to dawn and the Englishman looked to the four quarters of heaven,
what did he see but the castle too! Off he went without saying a word to
the Irishman, and everything happened to him just as it had done to the
Scotsman.

The poor Irishman was now left all alone, and did not know where
the others had gone to, so he just stayed where he was, very sad and
miserable. When night came he climbed up into the same tree as the
Englishman had been on the night before. As soon as day came he also saw
the castle, and set out towards it; but when he reached it he could
see no signs of fire or living being about it. Before long, however, he
heard the window opened above his head, looked up, and beheld the most
beautiful woman he had ever seen. He asked if she would give him food
and drink, and she answered kindly and heartily that she would, if he
would only come inside. This he did very willingly, and she set before
him food and drink that he had never seen the like of before. In the
room there was a bed, with diamond rings hanging at every loop of the
curtains, and everything that was in the room besides astonished him so
much that he actually forgot that he was hungry. When she saw that he
was not eating at all, she asked him what he wanted yet, to which he
replied that he would neither eat nor drink until he knew who she was,
or where she came from, or who had put her there.

‘I shall tell you that,’ said she. ‘I am an enchanted Princess, and my
father has promised that the man who releases me from the spell shall
have the third of his kingdom while he is alive, and the whole of it
after he is dead, and marry me as well. If ever I saw a man who looked
likely to do this, you are the one. I have been here for sixteen years
now, and no one who ever came to the castle has asked me who I was,
except yourself. Every other man that has come, so long as I have been
here, lies asleep in the big room down there.’

‘Tell me, then,’ said the Irishman, ‘what is the spell that has been
laid on you, and how you can be freed from it.’

‘There is a little room there,’ said the Princess, ‘and if I could get a
man to stay in it from ten o’clock till midnight for three nights on end
I should be freed from the spell.’

‘I am the man for you, then,’ said he; ‘I will take on hand to do it.’

Thereupon she brought him a pipe and tobacco, and he went into the room;
but before long he heard a hammering and knocking on the outside of the
door, and was told to open it.

‘I won’t,’ he said.

The next moment the door came flying in, and those outside along with
it. They knocked him down, and kicked him, and knelt on his body till it
came to midnight; but as soon as the cock crew they all disappeared. The
Irishman was little more than alive by this time. As soon as daylight
appeared the Princess came, and found him lying full length on the
floor, unable to speak a word. She took a bottle, rubbed him from head
to foot with something from it, and thereupon he was as sound as ever;
but after what he had got that night he was very unwilling to try it a
second time. The Princess, however, entreated him to stay, saying
that the next night would not be so bad, and in the end he gave in and
stayed.

When it was getting near midnight he heard them ordering him to open the
door, and there were three of them for every one that there had been the
previous evening. He did not make the slightest movement to go out to
them or to open the door, but before long they broke it up, and were in
on top of him. They laid hold of him, and kept throwing him between them
up to the ceiling, or jumping above him, until the cock crew, when they
all disappeared. When day came the Princess went to the room to see if
he was still alive, and taking the bottle put it to his nostrils, which
soon brought him to himself. The first thing he said then was that he
was a fool to go on getting himself killed for anyone he ever saw, and
was determined to be off and stay there no longer, When the Princess
learned his intention she entreated him to stay, reminding him that
another night would free her from the spell. ‘Besides,’ she said, ‘if
there is a single spark of life in you when the day comes, the stuff
that is in this bottle will make you as sound as ever you were.’

With all this the Irishman decided to stay; but that night there were
three at him for every one that was there the two nights before, and
it looked very unlikely that he would be alive in the morning after all
that he got. When morning dawned, and the Princess came to see if he was
still alive, she found him lying on the floor as if dead. She tried to
see if there was breath in him, but could not quite make it out.
Then she put her hand on his pulse, and found a faint movement in it.
Accordingly she poured what was in the bottle on him, and before long
he rose up on his feet, and was as well as ever he was. So that business
was finished, and the Princess was freed from the spell.

The Princess then told the Irishman that she must go away for the
present, but would return for him in a few days in a carriage drawn by
four grey horses. He told her to ‘be aisy,’ and not speak like that to
him. ‘I have paid dear for you for the last three nights,’ he said, ‘if
I have to part with you now;’ but in the twinkling of an eye she had
disappeared. He did not know what to do with himself when he saw that
she was gone, but before she went she had given him a little rod, with
which he could, when he pleased, waken the men who had been sleeping
there, some of them for sixteen years.

After being thus left alone, he went in and stretched himself on three
chairs that were in the room, when what does he see coming in at the
door but a little fair-haired lad.

‘Where did you come from, my lad?’ said the Irishman.

‘I came to make ready your food for you,’ said he.

‘Who told you to do that?’ said the Irishman.

‘My mistress,’ answered the lad--‘the Princess that was under the spell
and is now free.’

By this the Irishman knew that she had sent the lad to wait on him. The
lad also told him that his mistress wished him to be ready next morning
at nine o’clock, when she would come for him with the carriage, as she
had promised. He was greatly pleased at this, and next morning, when
the time was drawing near, went out into the garden; but the little
fair-haired lad took a big pin out of his pocket, and stuck it into the
back of the Irishman’s coat without his noticing it, whereupon he fell
sound asleep.

Before long the Princess came with the carriage and four horses, and
asked the lad whether his master was awake. He said that he wasn’t. ‘It
is bad for him,’ said she, ‘when the night is not long enough for him to
sleep. Tell him that if he doesn’t meet me at this time to-morrow it is
not likely that he will ever see me again all his life.’

As soon as she was gone the lad took the pin out of his master’s coat,
who instantly awoke. The first word he said to the lad was, ‘Have you
seen her?’

‘Yes,’ said he, ‘and she bade me tell you that if you don’t meet her at
nine o’clock to-morrow you will never see her again.’

He was very sorry when he heard this, and could not understand why the
sleep should have fallen upon him just when she was coming. He decided,
however, to go early to bed that night, in order to rise in time nest
morning, and so he did. When it was getting near nine o’clock he went
out to the garden to wait till she came, and the fair-haired lad along
with him; but as soon as the lad got the chance he stuck the pin into
his master’s coat again and he fell asleep as before. Precisely at nine
o’clock came the Princess in the carriage with four horses, and asked
the lad if his master had got up yet; but he said ‘No, he was asleep,
just as he was the day before.’ ‘Dear! dear!’ said the Princess, ‘I am
sorry for him. Was the sleep he had last night not enough for him? Tell
him that he will never see me here again; and here is a sword that you
will give him in my name, and my blessing along with it.’

With this she went off, and as soon as she had gone the lad took the pin
out of his master’s coat. He awoke instantly, and the first word he said
was, ‘Have you seen her?’ The lad said that he had, and there was the
sword she had left for him. The Irishman was ready to kill the lad out
of sheer vexation, but when he gave a glance over his shoulder not a
trace of the fair-haired lad was left.

Being thus left all alone, he thought of going into the room where all
the men were lying asleep, and there among the rest he found his two
comrades who had deserted along with him. Then he remembered what the
Princess had told him--that he had only to touch them with the rod she
had given him and they would all awake; and the first he touched were
his own comrades. They started to their feet at once, and he gave them
as much silver and gold as they could carry when they went away. There
was plenty to do before he got all the others wakened, for the two doors
of the castle were crowded with them all the day long.

The loss of the Princess, however, kept rankling in his mind day and
night, till finally he thought he would go about the world to see if he
could find anyone to give him news of her. So he took the best horse in
the stable and set out. Three years he spent travelling through forests
and wildernesses, but could find no one able to tell him anything of the
Princess. At last he fell into so great despair that he thought he would
put an end to his own life, and for this purpose laid hold of the sword
that she had given him by the hands of the fair-haired lad; but on
drawing it from its sheath he noticed that there was some writing on one
side of the blade. He looked at this, and read there, ‘You will find me
in the Blue Mountains.’ This made him take heart again, and he gave up
the idea of killing himself, thinking that he would go on in hope of
meeting some one who could tell him where the Blue Mountains were. After
he had gone a long way without thinking where he was going, he saw at
last a light far away, and made straight for it. On reaching it he found
it came from a little house, and as soon as the man inside heard the
noise of the horse’s feet he came out to see who was there. Seeing a
stranger on horseback, he asked what brought him there and where he was
going.

‘I have lived here,’ said he, ‘for three hundred years, and all that
time I have not seen a single human being but yourself.’

‘I have been going about for the last three years,’ said the Irishman,
‘to see if I could find anyone who can tell me where the Blue Mountains
are.’

‘Come in,’ said the old man, ‘and stay with me all night. I have a
book which contains the history of the world, which I shall go through
to-night, and if there is such a place as the Blue Mountains in it we
shall find it out.’

The Irishman stayed there all night, and as soon as morning came rose
to go. The old man said he had not gone to sleep all night for going
through the book, but there was not a word about the Blue Mountains
in it. ‘But I’ll tell you what,’ he said, ‘if there is such a place on
earth at all, I have a brother who lives nine hundred miles from here,
and he is sure to know where they are, if anyone in this world does.’
The Irishman answered that he could never go these nine hundred miles,
for his horse was giving in already. ‘That doesn’t matter,’ said the old
man; ‘I can do better than that. I have only to blow my whistle and you
will be at my brother’s house before nightfall.’

So he blew the whistle, and the Irishman did not know where on earth he
was until he found himself at the other old man’s door, who also told
him that it was three hundred years since he had seen anyone, and asked
him where he was going.

‘I am going to see if I can find anyone that can tell me where the Blue
Mountains are,’ he said.

‘If you will stay with me to-night,’ said the old man, ‘I have a book
of the history of the world, and I shall know where they are before
daylight, if there is such a place in it at all.’

He stayed there all night, but there was not a word in the book about
the Blue Mountains. Seeing that he was rather cast down, the old man
told him that he had a brother nine hundred miles away, and that if
information could be got about them from anyone it would be from him;
‘and I will enable you,’ he said, ‘to reach the place where he lives
before night.’ So he blew his whistle, and the Irishman landed at the
brother’s house before nightfall. When the old man saw him he said he
had not seen a single man for three hundred years, and was very much
surprised to see anyone come to him now.

‘Where are you going to?’ he said.

‘I am going about asking for the Blue Mountains,’ said the Irishman.

‘The Blue Mountains?’ said the old man.

‘Yes,’ said the Irishman.

‘I never heard the name before; but if they do exist I shall find them
out. I am master of all the birds in the world, and have only to blow my
whistle and every one will come to me. I shall then ask each of them to
tell where it came from, and if there is any way of finding out the Blue
Mountains that is it.’

So he blew his whistle, and when he blew it then all the birds of the
world began to gather. The old man questioned each of them as to where
they had come from, but there was not one of them that had come from the
Blue Mountains. After he had run over them all, however, he missed a
big Eagle that was wanting, and wondered that it had not come. Soon
afterwards he saw something big coming towards him, darkening the sky.
It kept coming nearer and growing bigger, and what was this after all
but the Eagle? When she arrived the old man scolded her, and asked what
had kept her so long behind.

‘I couldn’t help it,’ she said; ‘I had more than twenty times further to
come than any bird that has come here to-day.’

‘Where have you come from, then?’ said the old man.

‘From the Blue Mountains,’ said she.

‘Indeed!’ said the old man; and what are they doing there?’

‘They are making ready this very day,’ said the Eagle, ‘for the marriage
of the daughter of the King of the Blue Mountains. For three years now
she has refused to marry anyone whatsoever, until she should give up all
hope of the coming of the man who released her from the spell. Now she
can wait no longer, for three years is the time that she agreed with her
father to remain without marrying.’

The Irishman knew that it was for himself she had been waiting so
long, but he was unable to make any better of it, for he had no hope of
reaching the Blue Mountains all his life. The old man noticed how sad he
grew, and asked the Eagle what she would take for carrying this man on
her back to the Blue Mountains.

‘I must have threescore cattle killed,’ said she, ‘and cut up into
quarters, and every time I look over my shoulder he must throw one of
them into my mouth.’

As soon as the Irishman and the old man heard her demand they went out
hunting, and before evening they had killed three-score cattle. They
made quarters of them, as the Eagle told them, and then the old man
asked her to lie down, till they would get it all heaped up on her back.
First of all, though, they had to get a ladder of fourteen steps, to
enable them to get on to the Eagle’s back, and there they piled up the
meat as well as they could. Then the old man told the Irishman to mount,
and to remember to throw a quarter of beef to her every time she looked
round. He went up, and the old man gave the Eagle the word to be off,
which she instantly obeyed; and every time she turned her head the
Irishman threw a quarter of beef into her mouth.

As they came near the borders of the kingdom of the Blue Mountains,
however, the beef was done, and, when the Eagle looked over her
shoulder, what was the Irishman at but throwing the stone between her
tail and her neck! At this she turned a complete somersault, and threw
the Irishman off into the sea, where he fell into the bay that was right
in front of the King’s Palace. Fortunately the points of his toes just
touched the bottom, and he managed to get ashore.

When he went up into the town all the streets were gleaming with light,
and the wedding of the Princess was just about to begin. He went into
the first house he came to, and this happened to be the house of the
King’s hen-wife. He asked the old woman what was causing all the noise
and light in the town.

‘The Princess,’ said she, ‘is going to be married to-night against her
will, for she has been expecting every day that the man who freed her
from the spell would come.’

‘There is a guinea for you,’ said he; ‘go and bring her here.’

The old woman went, and soon returned along with the Princess. She and
the Irishman recognised each other, and were married, and had a great
wedding that lasted for a year and a day.




THE TINDER-BOX

A soldier came marching along the high road--left, right! A left, right!
He had his knapsack on his back and a sword by his side, for he had been
to the wars and was now returning home.

An old Witch met him on the road. She was very ugly to look at: her
under-lip hung down to her breast.

‘Good evening, Soldier!’ she said. ‘What a fine sword and knapsack you
have! You are something like a soldier! You ought to have as much money
as you would like to carry!’

‘Thank you, old Witch,’ said the Soldier.

‘Do you see that great tree there?’ said the Witch, pointing to a tree
beside them. ‘It is hollow within. You must climb up to the top, and
then you will see a hole through which you can let yourself down into
the tree. I will tie a rope round your waist, so that I may be able to
pull you up again when you call.’

‘What shall I do down there?’ asked the Soldier.

‘Get money!’ answered the Witch. ‘Listen! When you reach the bottom of
the tree you will find yourself in a large hall; it is light there, for
there are more than three hundred lamps burning. Then you will see three
doors, which you can open--the keys are in the locks. If you go into the
first room, you will see a great chest in the middle of the floor with
a dog sitting upon it; he has eyes as large as saucers, but you needn’t
trouble about him. I will give you my blue-check apron, which you must
spread out on the floor, and then go back quickly and fetch the dog and
set him upon it; open the chest and take as much money as you like. It
is copper there. If you would rather have silver, you must go into the
next room, where there is a dog with eyes as large as mill-wheels.
But don’t take any notice of him; just set him upon my apron, and help
yourself to the money. If you prefer gold, you can get that too, if you
go into the third room, and as much as you like to carry. But the dog
that guards the chest there has eyes as large as the Round Tower at
Copenhagen! He is a savage dog, I can tell you; but you needn’t be
afraid of him either. Only, put him on my apron and he won’t touch you,
and you can take out of the chest as much gold as you like!’

‘Come, this is not bad!’ said the Soldier. ‘But what am I to give you,
old Witch; for surely you are not going to do this for nothing?’

‘Yes, I am!’ replied the Witch. ‘Not a single farthing will I take! For
me you shall bring nothing but an old tinder-box which my grandmother
forgot last time she was down there.’

‘Well, tie the rope round my waist! ‘said the Soldier.

‘Here it is,’ said the Witch, ‘and here is my blue-check apron.’

Then the Soldier climbed up the tree, let himself down through the hole,
and found himself standing, as the Witch had said, underground in the
large hall, where the three hundred lamps were burning.

Well, he opened the first door. Ugh! there sat the dog with eyes as big
as saucers glaring at him.

‘You are a fine fellow!’ said the Soldier, and put him on the Witch’s
apron, took as much copper as his pockets could hold; then he shut the
chest, put the dog on it again, and went into the second room. Sure
enough there sat the dog with eyes as large as mill-wheels.

‘You had better not look at me so hard!’ said the Soldier. ‘Your eyes
will come out of their sockets!’

And then he set the dog on the apron. When he saw all the silver in the
chest, he threw away the copper he had taken, and filled his pockets and
knapsack with nothing but silver.

Then he went into the third room. Horrors! the dog there had two eyes,
each as large as the Round Tower at Copenhagen, spinning round in his
head like wheels.

‘Good evening!’ said the Soldier and saluted, for he had never seen
a dog like this before. But when he had examined him more closely, he
thought to himself: ‘Now then, I’ve had enough of this!’ and put him
down on the floor, and opened the chest. Heavens! what a heap of gold
there was! With all that he could buy up the whole town, and all the
sugar pigs, all the tin soldiers, whips and rocking-horses in the whole
world. Now he threw away all the silver with which he had filled his
pockets and knapsack, and filled them with gold instead--yes, all his
pockets, his knapsack, cap and boots even, so that he could hardly walk.
Now he was rich indeed. He put the dog back upon the chest, shut the
door, and then called up through the tree:

‘Now pull me up again, old Witch!’

‘Have you got the tinder-box also?’ asked the Witch.

‘Botheration!’ said the Soldier, ‘I had clean forgotten it!’ And then he
went back and fetched it.

The Witch pulled him up, and there he stood again on the high road, with
pockets, knapsack, cap and boots filled with gold.

‘What do you want to do with the tinder-box?’ asked the Soldier.

‘That doesn’t matter to you,’ replied the Witch. ‘You have got your
money, give me my tinder-box.’

‘We’ll see!’ said the Soldier. ‘Tell me at once what you want to do with
it, or I will draw my sword, and cut off your head!’

‘No!’ screamed the Witch.

The Soldier immediately cut off her head. That was the end of her! But
he tied up all his gold in her apron, slung it like a bundle over his
shoulder, put the tinder-box in his pocket, and set out towards the
town.

It was a splendid town! He turned into the finest inn, ordered the best
chamber and his favourite dinner; for now that he had so much money he
was really rich.

It certainly occurred to the servant who had to clean his boots that
they were astonishingly old boots for such a rich lord. But that
was because he had not yet bought new ones; next day he appeared in
respectable boots and fine clothes. Now, instead of a common soldier
he had become a noble lord, and the people told him about all the grand
doings of the town and the King, and what a beautiful Princess his
daughter was.

‘How can one get to see her?’ asked the Soldier.

‘She is never to be seen at all!’ they told him; ‘she lives in a great
copper castle, surrounded by many walls and towers! No one except the
King may go in or out, for it is prophesied that she will marry a common
soldier, and the King cannot submit to that.’

‘I should very much like to see her,’ thought the Soldier; but he could
not get permission.

Now he lived very gaily, went to the theatre, drove in the King’s
garden, and gave the poor a great deal of money, which was very nice
of him; he had experienced in former times how hard it is not to have a
farthing in the world. Now he was rich, wore fine clothes, and made many
friends, who all said that he was an excellent man, a real nobleman. And
the Soldier liked that. But as he was always spending money, and never
made any more, at last the day came when he had nothing left but two
shillings, and he had to leave the beautiful rooms in which he had been
living, and go into a little attic under the roof, and clean his own
boots, and mend them with a darning-needle. None of his friends came to
visit him there, for there were too many stairs to climb.

It was a dark evening, and he could not even buy a light. But all at
once it flashed across him that there was a little end of tinder in the
tinder-box, which he had taken from the hollow tree into which the Witch
had helped him down. He found the box with the tinder in it; but just as
he was kindling a light, and had struck a spark out of the tinder-box,
the door burst open, and the dog with eyes as large as saucers, which he
had seen down in the tree, stood before him and said:

‘What does my lord command?’

‘What’s the meaning of this?’ exclaimed the Soldier. ‘This is a pretty
kind of tinder-box, if I can get whatever I want like this. Get me
money!’ he cried to the dog, and hey, presto! he was off and back again,
holding a great purse full of money in his mouth.

Now the Soldier knew what a capital tinder-box this was. If he rubbed
once, the dog that sat on the chest of copper appeared; if he rubbed
twice, there came the dog that watched over the silver chest; and if
he rubbed three times, the one that guarded the gold appeared. Now, the
Soldier went down again to his beautiful rooms, and appeared once more
in splendid clothes. All his friends immediately recognised him again,
and paid him great court.

One day he thought to himself: ‘It is very strange that no one can get
to see the Princess. They all say she is very pretty, but what’s the use
of that if she has to sit for ever in the great copper castle with
all the towers? Can I not manage to see her somehow? Where is my
tinder-box?’ and so he struck a spark, and, presto! there came the dog
with eyes as large as saucers.

‘It is the middle of the night, I know,’ said the Soldier; ‘but I should
very much like to see the Princess for a moment.’

The dog was already outside the door, and before the Soldier could look
round, in he came with the Princess. She was lying asleep on the
dog’s back, and was so beautiful that anyone could see she was a real
Princess. The Soldier really could not refrain from kissing her--he was
such a thorough Soldier. Then the dog ran back with the Princess. But
when it was morning, and the King and Queen were drinking tea, the
Princess said that the night before she had had such a strange dream
about a dog and a Soldier: she had ridden on the dog’s back, and the
Soldier had kissed her.

‘That is certainly a fine story,’ said the Queen. But the next night one
of the ladies-in-waiting was to watch at the Princess’s bed, to see if
it was only a dream, or if it had actually happened.

The Soldier had an overpowering longing to see the Princess again, and
so the dog came in the middle of the night and fetched her, running as
fast as he could. But the lady-in-waiting slipped on india-rubber shoes
and followed them. When she saw them disappear into a large house, she
thought to herself: ‘Now I know where it is; ‘and made a great cross on
the door with a piece of chalk. Then she went home and lay down, and the
dog came back also, with the Princess. But when he saw that a cross had
been made on the door of the house where the Soldier lived, he took a
piece of chalk also, and made crosses on all the doors in the town; and
that was very clever, for now the lady-in-waiting could not find the
right house, as there were crosses on all the doors.

Early next morning the King, Queen, ladies-in-waiting, and officers came
out to see where the Princess had been.

‘There it is!’ said the King, when he saw the first door with a cross on
it.

‘No, there it is, my dear!’ said the Queen, when she likewise saw a door
with a cross.

‘But here is one, and there is another!’ they all exclaimed; wherever
they looked there was a cross on the door. Then they realised that the
sign would not help them at all.

But the Queen was an extremely clever woman, who could do a great deal
more than just drive in a coach. She took her great golden scissors, cut
up a piece of silk, and made a pretty little bag of it. This she filled
with the finest buckwheat grains, and tied it round the Princess’ neck;
this done, she cut a little hole in the bag, so that the grains would
strew the whole road wherever the Princess went.

In the night the dog came again, took the Princess on his back and ran
away with her to the Soldier, who was very much in love with her, and
would have liked to have been a Prince, so that he might have had her
for his wife.

The dog did not notice how the grains were strewn right from the castle
to the Soldier’s window, where he ran up the wall with the Princess.

In the morning the King and the Queen saw plainly where their daughter
had been, and they took the Soldier and put him into prison.

There he sat. Oh, how dark and dull it was there! And they told him:
‘To-morrow you are to be hanged.’ Hearing that did not exactly cheer
him, and he had left his tinder-box in the inn.

Next morning he could see through the iron grating in front of his
little window how the people were hurrying out of the town to see him
hanged. He heard the drums and saw the soldiers marching; all the
people were running to and fro. Just below his window was a shoemaker’s
apprentice, with leather apron and shoes; he was skipping along so
merrily that one of his shoes flew off and fell against the wall, just
where the Soldier was sitting peeping through the iron grating.

‘Oh, shoemaker’s boy, you needn’t be in such a hurry!’ said the Soldier
to him. ‘There’s nothing going on till I arrive. But if you will run
back to the house where I lived, and fetch me my tinder-box, I will give
you four shillings. But you must put your best foot foremost.’

The shoemaker’s boy was very willing to earn four shillings, and fetched
the tinder-box, gave it to the Soldier, and--yes--now you shall hear.

Outside the town a great scaffold had been erected, and all round were
standing the soldiers, and hundreds of thousands of people. The King and
Queen were sitting on a magnificent throne opposite the judges and the
whole council.

The Soldier was already standing on the top of the ladder; but when they
wanted to put the rope round his neck, he said that the fulfilment of
one innocent request was always granted to a poor criminal before he
underwent his punishment. He would so much like to smoke a small pipe of
tobacco; it would be his last pipe in this world.

The King could not refuse him this, and so he took out his tinder-box,
and rubbed it once, twice, three times. And lo, and behold I there stood
all three dogs--the one with eyes as large as saucers, the second with
eyes as large as mill-wheels, and the third with eyes each as large as
the Round Tower of Copenhagen.

‘Help me now, so that I may not be hanged!’ cried the Soldier. And
thereupon the dogs fell upon the judges and the whole council, seized
some by the legs, others by the nose, and threw them so high into the
air that they fell and were smashed into pieces.

‘I won’t stand this!’ said the King; but the largest dog seized him
too, and the Queen as well, and threw them up after the others. This
frightened the soldiers, and all the people cried: ‘Good Soldier, you
shall be our King, and marry the beautiful Princess!’

Then they put the Soldier into the King’s coach, and the three dogs
danced in front, crying ‘Hurrah!’ And the boys whistled and the soldiers
presented arms.

The Princess came out of the copper castle, and became Queen; and that
pleased her very much.

The wedding festivities lasted for eight days, and the dogs sat at table
and made eyes at everyone.




THE WITCH IN THE STONE BOAT(31)

(31) From the Icelandic.

There were once a King and a Queen, and they had a son called Sigurd,
who was very strong and active, and good-looking. When the King came
to be bowed down with the weight of years he spoke to his son, and
said that now it was time for him to look out for a fitting match for
himself, for he did not know how long he might last now, and he would
like to see him married before he died.

Sigurd was not averse to this, and asked his father where he thought
it best to look for a wife. The King answered that in a certain country
there was a King who had a beautiful daughter, and he thought it would
be most desirable if Sigurd could get her. So the two parted, and Sigurd
prepared for the journey, and went to where his father had directed him.

He came to the King and asked his daughter’s hand, which he readily
granted him, but only on the condition that he should remain there as
long as he could, for the King himself was not strong and not very able
to govern his kingdom. Sigurd accepted this condition, but added that
he would have to get leave to go home again to his own country when
he heard news of his father’s death. After that Sigurd married the
Princess, and helped his father-in-law to govern the kingdom. He and the
Princess loved each other dearly, and after a year a son came to them,
who was two years old when word came to Sigurd that his father was dead.
Sigurd now prepared to return home with his wife and child, and went on
board ship to go by sea.

They had sailed for several days, when the breeze suddenly fell, and
there came a dead calm, at a time when they needed only one day’s voyage
to reach home. Sigurd and his Queen were one day on deck, when most of
the others on the ship had fallen asleep. There they sat and talked for
a while, and had their little son along with them. After a time Sigurd
became so heavy with sleep that he could no longer keep awake, so he
went below and lay down, leaving the Queen alone on the deck, playing
with her son.

A good while after Sigurd had gone below the Queen saw something black
on the sea, which seemed to be coming nearer. As it approached she
could make out that it was a boat, and could see the figure of some one
sitting in it and rowing it. At last the boat came alongside the ship,
and now the Queen saw that it was a stone boat, out of which there
came up on board the ship a fearfully ugly Witch. The Queen was more
frightened than words can describe, and could neither speak a word nor
move from the place so as to awaken the King or the sailors. The Witch
came right up to the Queen, took the child from her and laid it on the
deck; then she took the Queen, and stripped her of all her fine clothes,
which she proceeded to put on herself, and looked then like a human
being. Last of all she took the Queen, put her into the boat, and said--

‘This spell I lay upon you, that you slacken not your course until you
come to my brother in the Underworld.’

The Queen sat stunned and motionless, but the boat at once shot away
from the ship with her, and before long she was out of sight.

When the boat could no longer be seen the child began to cry, and though
the Witch tried to quiet it she could not manage it; so she went below
to where the King was sleeping with the child on her arm, and awakened
him, scolding him for leaving them alone on deck, while he and all the
crew were asleep. It was great carelessness of him, she said, to leave
no one to watch the ship with her.

Sigurd was greatly surprised to hear his Queen scold him so much, for
she had never said an angry word to him before; but he thought it was
quite excusable in this case, and tried to quiet the child along with
her, but it was no use. Then he went and wakened the sailors, and
bade them hoist the sails, for a breeze had sprung up and was blowing
straight towards the harbour.

They soon reached the land which Sigurd was to rule over, and found all
the people sorrowful for the old King’s death, but they became glad when
they got Sigurd back to the Court, and made him King over them.

The King’s son, however, hardly ever stopped crying from the time he
had been taken from his mother on the deck of the ship, although he had
always been such a good child before, so that at last the King had to
get a nurse for him--one of the maids of the Court. As soon as the child
got into her charge he stopped crying, and behaved well as before.

After the sea-voyage it seemed to the King that the Queen had altered
very much in many ways, and not for the better. He thought her much more
haughty and stubborn and difficult to deal with than she used to be.
Before long others began to notice this as well as the King. In the
Court there were two young fellows, one of eighteen years old, the other
of nineteen, who were very fond of playing chess, and often sat long
inside playing at it. Their room was next the Queen’s, and often during
the day they heard the Queen talking.

One day they paid more attention than usual when they heard her talk,
and put their ears close to a crack in the wall between the rooms, and
heard the Queen say quite plainly, ‘When I yawn a little, then I am a
nice little maiden; when I yawn half-way, then I am half a troll; and
when I yawn fully, then I am a troll altogether.’

As she said this she yawned tremendously, and in a moment had put on
the appearance of a fearfully ugly troll. Then there came up through the
floor of the room a three-headed Giant with a trough full of meat, who
saluted her as his sister and set down the trough before her. She began
to eat out of it, and never stopped till she had finished it. The young
fellows saw all this going on, but did not hear the two of them say
anything to each other. They were astonished though at how greedily the
Queen devoured the meat, and how much she ate of it, and were no longer
surprised that she took so little when she sat at table with the King.
As soon as she had finished it the Giant disappeared with the trough by
the same way as he had come, and the Queen returned to her human shape.

Now we must go back to the King’s son after he had been put in charge of
the nurse. One evening, after she had lit a candle and was holding the
child, several planks sprang up in the floor of the room, and out at the
opening came a beautiful woman dressed in white, with an iron belt round
her waist, to which was fastened an iron chain that went down into the
ground. The woman came up to the nurse, took the child from her,
and pressed it to her breast; then she gave it back to the nurse and
returned by the same way as she had come, and the floor closed over her
again. Although the woman had not spoken a single word to her, the nurse
was very much frightened, but told no one about it.

Next evening the same thing happened again, just as before, but as the
woman was going away she said in a sad tone, ‘Two are gone, and one
only is left,’ and then disappeared as before. The nurse was still more
frightened when she heard the woman say this, and thought that perhaps
some danger was hanging over the child, though she had no ill-opinion of
the unknown woman, who, indeed, had behaved towards the child as if it
were her own. The most mysterious thing was the woman saying ‘and only
one is left;’ but the nurse guessed that this must mean that only one
day was left, since she had come for two days already.

At last the nurse made up her mind to go to the King, and told him the
whole story, and asked him to be present in person next day about the
time when the woman usually came. The King promised to do so, and came
to the nurse’s room a little before the time, and sat down on a chair
with his drawn sword in his hand. Soon after the planks in the floor
sprang up as before, and the woman came up, dressed in white, with the
iron belt and chain. The King saw at once that it was his own Queen, and
immediately hewed asunder the iron chain that was fastened to the belt.
This was followed by such noises and crashings down in the earth that
all the King’s Palace shook, so that no one expected anything else than
to see every bit of it shaken to pieces. At last, however, the noises
and shaking stopped, and they began to come to themselves again.

The King and Queen embraced each other, and she told him the whole
story--how the Witch came to the ship when they were all asleep and sent
her off in the boat. After she had gone so far that she could not see
the ship, she sailed on through darkness until she landed beside a
three-headed Giant. The Giant wished her to marry him, but she refused;
whereupon he shut her up by herself, and told her she would never get
free until she consented. After a time she began to plan how to get her
freedom, and at last told him that she would consent if he would allow
her to visit her son on earth three days on end. This he agreed to, but
put on her this iron belt and chain, the other end of which he fastened
round his own waist, and the great noises that were heard when the King
cut the chain must have been caused by the Giant’s falling down the
underground passage when the chain gave way so suddenly. The Giant’s
dwelling, indeed, was right under the Palace, and the terrible shakings
must have been caused by him in his death-throes.

The King now understood how the Queen he had had for some time past had
been so ill-tempered. He at once had a sack drawn over her head and made
her be stoned to death, and after that torn in pieces by untamed horses.
The two young fellows also told now what they had heard and seen in the
Queen’s room, for before this they had been afraid to say anything about
it, on account of the Queen’s power.

The real Queen was now restored to all her dignity, and was beloved by
all. The nurse was married to a nobleman, and the King and Queen gave
her splendid presents.




THUMBELINA

There was once a woman who wanted to have quite a tiny, little child,
but she did not know where to get one from. So one day she went to an
old Witch and said to her: ‘I should so much like to have a tiny, little
child; can you tell me where I can get one?’

‘Oh, we have just got one ready!’ said the Witch. ‘Here is a barley-corn
for you, but it’s not the kind the farmer sows in his field, or feeds
the cocks and hens with, I can tell you. Put it in a flower-pot, and
then you will see something happen.’

‘Oh, thank you!’ said the woman, and gave the Witch a shilling, for
that was what it cost. Then she went home and planted the barley-corn;
immediately there grew out of it a large and beautiful flower, which
looked like a tulip, but the petals were tightly closed as if it were
still only a bud.

‘What a beautiful flower!’ exclaimed the woman, and she kissed the red
and yellow petals; but as she kissed them the flower burst open. It
was a real tulip, such as one can see any day; but in the middle of the
blossom, on the green velvety petals, sat a little girl, quite tiny,
trim, and pretty. She was scarcely half a thumb in height; so they
called her Thumbelina. An elegant polished walnut-shell served
Thumbelina as a cradle, the blue petals of a violet were her mattress,
and a rose-leaf her coverlid. There she lay at night, but in the
day-time she used to play about on the table; here the woman had put a
bowl, surrounded by a ring of flowers, with their stalks in water, in
the middle of which floated a great tulip pedal, and on this Thumbelina
sat, and sailed from one side of the bowl to the other, rowing herself
with two white horse-hairs for oars. It was such a pretty sight! She
could sing, too, with a voice more soft and sweet than had ever been
heard before.

One night, when she was lying in her pretty little bed, an old toad
crept in through a broken pane in the window. She was very ugly, clumsy,
and clammy; she hopped on to the table where Thumbelina lay asleep under
the red rose-leaf.

‘This would make a beautiful wife for my son,’ said the toad, taking up
the walnut-shell, with Thumbelina inside, and hopping with it through
the window into the garden.

There flowed a great wide stream, with slippery and marshy banks; here
the toad lived with her son. Ugh! how ugly and clammy he was, just like
his mother! ‘Croak, croak, croak!’ was all he could say when he saw the
pretty little girl in the walnut-shell.

‘Don’t talk so load, or you’ll wake her,’ said the old toad. ‘She might
escape us even now; she is as light as a feather. We will put her at
once on a broad water-lily leaf in the stream. That will be quite an
island for her; she is so small and light. She can’t run away from us
there, whilst we are preparing the guest-chamber under the marsh where
she shall live.’

Outside in the brook grew many water-lilies, with broad green leaves,
which looked as if they were swimming about on the water.

The leaf farthest away was the largest, and to this the old toad swam
with Thumbelina in her walnut-shell.

The tiny Thumbelina woke up very early in the morning, and when she saw
where she was she began to cry bitterly; for on every side of the great
green leaf was water, and she could not get to the land.

The old toad was down under the marsh, decorating her room with
rushes and yellow marigold leaves, to make it very grand for her new
daughter-in-law; then she swam out with her ugly son to the leaf where
Thumbelina lay. She wanted to fetch the pretty cradle to put it into her
room before Thumbelina herself came there. The old toad bowed low in the
water before her, and said: ‘Here is my son; you shall marry him, and
live in great magnificence down under the marsh.’

‘Croak, croak, croak!’ was all that the son could say. Then they took
the neat little cradle and swam away with it; but Thumbelina sat alone
on the great green leaf and wept, for she did not want to live with the
clammy toad, or marry her ugly son. The little fishes swimming about
under the water had seen the toad quite plainly, and heard what she had
said; so they put up their heads to see the little girl. When they saw
her, they thought her so pretty that they were very sorry she should
go down with the ugly toad to live. No; that must not happen. They
assembled in the water round the green stalk which supported the leaf
on which she was sitting, and nibbled the stem in two. Away floated the
leaf down the stream, bearing Thumbelina far beyond the reach of the
toad.

On she sailed past several towns, and the little birds sitting in the
bushes saw her, and sang, ‘What a pretty little girl!’ The leaf floated
farther and farther away; thus Thumbelina left her native land.

A beautiful little white butterfly fluttered above her, and at
last settled on the leaf. Thumbelina pleased him, and she, too,
was delighted, for now the toads could not reach her, and it was so
beautiful where she was travelling; the sun shone on the water and made
it sparkle like the brightest silver. She took off her sash, and tied
one end round the butterfly; the other end she fastened to the leaf, so
that now it glided along with her faster than ever.

A great cockchafer came flying past; he caught sight of Thumbelina, and
in a moment had put his arms round her slender waist, and had flown off
with her to a tree. The green leaf floated away down the stream, and
the butterfly with it, for he was fastened to the leaf and could not get
loose from it. Oh, dear! how terrified poor little Thumbelina was when
the cockchafer flew off with her to the tree! But she was especially
distressed on the beautiful white butterfly’s account, as she had tied
him fast, so that if he could not get away he must starve to death. But
the cockchafer did not trouble himself about that; he sat down with her
on a large green leaf, gave her the honey out of the flowers to eat, and
told her that she was very pretty, although she wasn’t in the least like
a cockchafer. Later on, all the other cockchafers who lived in the same
tree came to pay calls; they examined Thumbelina closely, and remarked,
‘Why, she has only two legs! How very miserable!’

‘She has no feelers!’ cried another.

‘How ugly she is!’ said all the lady chafers--and yet Thumbelina was
really very pretty.

The cockchafer who had stolen her knew this very well; but when he heard
all the ladies saying she was ugly, he began to think so too, and would
not keep her; she might go wherever she liked. So he flew down from the
tree with her and put her on a daisy. There she sat and wept, because
she was so ugly that the cockchafer would have nothing to do with her;
and yet she was the most beautiful creature imaginable, so soft and
delicate, like the loveliest rose-leaf.

The whole summer poor little Thumbelina lived alone in the great wood.
She plaited a bed for herself of blades of grass, and hung it up under a
clover-leaf, so that she was protected from the rain; she gathered
honey from the flowers for food, and drank the dew on the leaves every
morning. Thus the summer and autumn passed, but then came winter--the
long, cold winter. All the birds who had sung so sweetly about her had
flown away; the trees shed their leaves, the flowers died; the great
clover-leaf under which she had lived curled up, and nothing remained of
it but the withered stalk. She was terribly cold, for her clothes were
ragged, and she herself was so small and thin. Poor little Thumbelina!
she would surely be frozen to death. It began to snow, and every
snow-flake that fell on her was to her as a whole shovelful thrown on
one of us, for we are so big, and she was only an inch high. She wrapt
herself round in a dead leaf, but it was torn in the middle and gave her
no warmth; she was trembling with cold.

Just outside the wood where she was now living lay a great corn-field.
But the corn had been gone a long time; only the dry, bare stubble was
left standing in the frozen ground. This made a forest for her to wander
about in. All at once she came across the door of a field-mouse, who had
a little hole under a corn-stalk. There the mouse lived warm and snug,
with a store-room full of corn, a splendid kitchen and dining-room. Poor
little Thumbelina went up to the door and begged for a little piece of
barley, for she had not had anything to eat for the last two days.

‘Poor little creature!’ said the field-mouse, for she was a kind-hearted
old thing at the bottom. ‘Come into my warm room and have some dinner
with me.’

As Thumbelina pleased her, she said: ‘As far as I am concerned you may
spend the winter with me; but you must keep my room clean and tidy, and
tell me stories, for I like that very much.’

And Thumbelina did all that the kind old field-mouse asked, and did it
remarkably well too.

‘Now I am expecting a visitor,’ said the field-mouse; ‘my neighbour
comes to call on me once a week. He is in better circumstances than I
am, has great, big rooms, and wears a fine black-velvet coat. If you
could only marry him, you would be well provided for. But he is blind.
You must tell him all the prettiest stories you know.’

But Thumbelina did not trouble her head about him, for he was only a
mole. He came and paid them a visit in his black-velvet coat.

‘He is so rich and so accomplished,’ the field-mouse told her.

‘His house is twenty times larger than mine; he possesses great
knowledge, but he cannot bear the sun and the beautiful flowers, and
speaks slightingly of them, for he has never seen them.’

Thumbelina had to sing to him, so she sang ‘Lady-bird, lady-bird, fly
away home!’ and other songs so prettily that the mole fell in love with
her; but he did not say anything, he was a very cautious man. A short
time before he had dug a long passage through the ground from his own
house to that of his neighbour; in this he gave the field-mouse and
Thumbelina permission to walk as often as they liked. But he begged them
not to be afraid of the dead bird that lay in the passage: it was a real
bird with beak and feathers, and must have died a little time ago, and
now laid buried just where he had made his tunnel. The mole took a piece
of rotten wood in his mouth, for that glows like fire in the dark, and
went in front, lighting them through the long dark passage. When they
came to the place where the dead bird lay, the mole put his broad nose
against the ceiling and pushed a hole through, so that the daylight
could shine down. In the middle of the path lay a dead swallow, his
pretty wings pressed close to his sides, his claws and head drawn under
his feathers; the poor bird had evidently died of cold. Thumbelina was
very sorry, for she was very fond of all little birds; they had sung
and twittered so beautifully to her all through the summer. But the mole
kicked him with his bandy legs and said:

‘Now he can’t sing any more! It must be very miserable to be a little
bird! I’m thankful that none of my little children are; birds always
starve in winter.’

‘Yes, you speak like a sensible man,’ said the field-mouse. ‘What has
a bird, in spite of all his singing, in the winter-time? He must starve
and freeze, and that must be very pleasant for him, I must say!’

Thumbelina did not say anything; but when the other two had passed on
she bent down to the bird, brushed aside the feathers from his head,
and kissed his closed eyes gently. ‘Perhaps it was he that sang to me so
prettily in the summer,’ she thought. ‘How much pleasure he did give me,
dear little bird!’

The mole closed up the hole again which let in the light, and then
escorted the ladies home. But Thumbelina could not sleep that night;
so she got out of bed, and plaited a great big blanket of straw, and
carried it off, and spread it over the dead bird, and piled upon
it thistle-down as soft as cotton-wool, which she had found in the
field-mouse’s room, so that the poor little thing should lie warmly
buried.

‘Farewell, pretty little bird!’ she said. ‘Farewell, and thank you for
your beautiful songs in the summer, when the trees were green, and the
sun shone down warmly on us!’ Then she laid her head against the bird’s
heart. But the bird was not dead: he had been frozen, but now that she
had warmed him, he was coming to life again.

In autumn the swallows fly away to foreign lands; but there are some who
are late in starting, and then they get so cold that they drop down as
if dead, and the snow comes and covers them over.

Thumbelina trembled, she was so frightened; for the bird was very large
in comparison with herself--only an inch high. But she took courage,
piled up the down more closely over the poor swallow, fetched her own
coverlid and laid it over his head.

Next night she crept out again to him. There he was alive, but very
weak; he could only open his eyes for a moment and look at Thumbelina,
who was standing in front of him with a piece of rotten wood in her
hand, for she had no other lantern.

‘Thank you, pretty little child!’ said the swallow to her. ‘I am so
beautifully warm! Soon I shall regain my strength, and then I shall be
able to fly out again into the warm sunshine.’

‘Oh!’ she said, ‘it is very cold outside; it is snowing and freezing!
stay in your warm bed; I will take care of you!’

Then she brought him water in a petal, which he drank, after which he
related to her how he had torn one of his wings on a bramble, so that he
could not fly as fast as the other swallows, who had flown far away
to warmer lands. So at last he had dropped down exhausted, and then he
could remember no more. The whole winter he remained down there, and
Thumbelina looked after him and nursed him tenderly. Neither the mole
nor the field-mouse learnt anything of this, for they could not bear the
poor swallow.

When the spring came, and the sun warmed the earth again, the swallow
said farewell to Thumbelina, who opened the hole in the roof for him
which the mole had made. The sun shone brightly down upon her, and the
swallow asked her if she would go with him; she could sit upon his back.
Thumbelina wanted very much to fly far away into the green wood, but
she knew that the old field-mouse would be sad if she ran away. ‘No, I
mustn’t come!’ she said.

‘Farewell, dear good little girl!’ said the swallow, and flew off into
the sunshine. Thumbelina gazed after him with the tears standing in her
eyes, for she was very fond of the swallow.

‘Tweet, tweet!’ sang the bird, and flew into the green wood. Thumbelina
was very unhappy. She was not allowed to go out into the warm sunshine.
The corn which had been sowed in the field over the field-mouse’s home
grew up high into the air, and made a thick forest for the poor little
girl, who was only an inch high.

‘Now you are to be a bride, Thumbelina!’ said the field-mouse, ‘for our
neighbour has proposed for you! What a piece of fortune for a poor child
like you! Now you must set to work at your linen for your dowry, for
nothing must be lacking if you are to become the wife of our neighbour,
the mole!’

Thumbelina had to spin all day long, and every evening the mole visited
her, and told her that when the summer was over the sun would not shine
so hot; now it was burning the earth as hard as a stone. Yes, when the
summer had passed, they would keep the wedding.

But she was not at all pleased about it, for she did not like the stupid
mole. Every morning when the sun was rising, and every evening when it
was setting, she would steal out of the house-door, and when the breeze
parted the ears of corn so that she could see the blue sky through them,
she thought how bright and beautiful it must be outside, and longed to
see her dear swallow again. But he never came; no doubt he had flown
away far into the great green wood.

By the autumn Thumbelina had finished the dowry.

‘In four weeks you will be married!’ said the field-mouse; ‘don’t be
obstinate, or I shall bite you with my sharp white teeth! You will get
a fine husband! The King himself has not such a velvet coat. His
store-room and cellar are full, and you should be thankful for that.’

Well, the wedding-day arrived. The mole had come to fetch Thumbelina
to live with him deep down under the ground, never to come out into the
warm sun again, for that was what he didn’t like. The poor little girl
was very sad; for now she must say good-bye to the beautiful sun.

‘Farewell, bright sun!’ she cried, stretching out her arms towards it,
and taking another step outside the house; for now the corn had
been reaped, and only the dry stubble was left standing. ‘Farewell,
farewell!’ she said, and put her arms round a little red flower that
grew there. ‘Give my love to the dear swallow when you see him!’

‘Tweet, tweet!’ sounded in her ear all at once. She looked up. There was
the swallow flying past! As soon as he saw Thumbelina, he was very glad.
She told him how unwilling she was to marry the ugly mole, as then she
had to live underground where the sun never shone, and she could not
help bursting into tears.

‘The cold winter is coming now,’ said the swallow. ‘I must fly away to
warmer lands: will you come with me? You can sit on my back, and we will
fly far away from the ugly mole and his dark house, over the mountains,
to the warm countries where the sun shines more brightly than here,
where it is always summer, and there are always beautiful flowers.
Do come with me, dear little Thumbelina, who saved my life when I lay
frozen in the dark tunnel!’

‘Yes, I will go with you,’ said Thumbelina, and got on the swallow’s
back, with her feet on one of his outstretched wings. Up he flew into
the air, over woods and seas, over the great mountains where the snow
is always lying. And if she was cold she crept under his warm feathers,
only keeping her little head out to admire all the beautiful things in
the world beneath. At last they came to warm lands; there the sun was
brighter, the sky seemed twice as high, and in the hedges hung the
finest green and purple grapes; in the woods grew oranges and lemons:
the air was scented with myrtle and mint, and on the roads were
pretty little children running about and playing with great gorgeous
butterflies. But the swallow flew on farther, and it became more and
more beautiful. Under the most splendid green trees besides a blue
lake stood a glittering white-marble castle. Vines hung about the high
pillars; there were many swallows’ nests, and in one of these lived the
swallow who was carrying Thumbelina.

‘Here is my house!’ said he. ‘But it won’t do for you to live with me; I
am not tidy enough to please you. Find a home for yourself in one of the
lovely flowers that grow down there; now I will set you down, and you
can do whatever you like.’

‘That will be splendid!’ said she, clapping her little hands.

There lay a great white marble column which had fallen to the ground
and broken into three pieces, but between these grew the most beautiful
white flowers. The swallow flew down with Thumbelina, and set her upon
one of the broad leaves. But there, to her astonishment, she found
a tiny little man sitting in the middle of the flower, as white and
transparent as if he were made of glass; he had the prettiest golden
crown on his head, and the most beautiful wings on his shoulders; he
himself was no bigger than Thumbelina. He was the spirit of the flower.
In each blossom there dwelt a tiny man or woman; but this one was the
King over the others.

‘How handsome he is!’ whispered Thumbelina to the swallow.

The little Prince was very much frightened at the swallow, for in
comparison with one so tiny as himself he seemed a giant. But when he
saw Thumbelina, he was delighted, for she was the most beautiful girl he
had ever seen. So he took his golden crown from off his head and put it
on hers, asking her her name, and if she would be his wife, and then
she would be Queen of all the flowers. Yes! he was a different kind of
husband to the son of the toad and the mole with the black-velvet coat.
So she said ‘Yes’ to the noble Prince. And out of each flower came a
lady and gentleman, each so tiny and pretty that it was a pleasure to
see them. Each brought Thumbelina a present, but the best of all was a
beautiful pair of wings which were fastened on to her back, and now she
too could fly from flower to flower. They all wished her joy, and the
swallow sat above in his nest and sang the wedding march, and that he
did as well as he could; but he was sad, because he was very fond of
Thumbelina and did not want to be separated from her.

‘You shall not be called Thumbelina!’ said the spirit of the flower to
her; ‘that is an ugly name, and you are much too pretty for that. We
will call you May Blossom.’

‘Farewell, farewell!’ said the little swallow with a heavy heart, and
flew away to farther lands, far, far away, right back to Denmark. There
he had a little nest above a window, where his wife lived, who can tell
fairy-stories. ‘Tweet, tweet!’ he sang to her. And that is the way we
learnt the whole story.




THE NIGHTINGALE

In China, as I daresay you know, the Emperor is a Chinaman, and all his
courtiers are also Chinamen. The story I am going to tell you happened
many years ago, but it is worth while for you to listen to it, before it
is forgotten.

The Emperor’s Palace was the most splendid in the world, all made of
priceless porcelain, but so brittle and delicate that you had to take
great care how you touched it. In the garden were the most beautiful
flowers, and on the loveliest of them were tied silver bells which
tinkled, so that if you passed you could not help looking at the
flowers. Everything in the Emperor’s garden was admirably arranged with
a view to effect; and the garden was so large that even the gardener
himself did not know where it ended. If you ever got beyond it, you came
to a stately forest with great trees and deep lakes in it. The forest
sloped down to the sea, which was a clear blue. Large ships could
sail under the boughs of the trees, and in these trees there lived a
Nightingale. She sang so beautifully that even the poor fisherman who
had so much to do stood and listened when he came at night to cast his
nets. ‘How beautiful it is!’ he said; but he had to attend to his work,
and forgot about the bird. But when she sang the next night and the
fisherman came there again, he said the same thing, ‘How beautiful it
is!’

From all the countries round came travellers to the Emperor’s town, who
were astonished at the Palace and the garden. But when they heard the
Nightingale they all said, ‘This is the finest thing after all!’

The travellers told all about it when they went home, and learned
scholars wrote many books upon the town, the Palace, and the garden. But
they did not forget the Nightingale; she was praised the most, and all
the poets composed splendid verses on the Nightingale in the forest by
the deep sea.

The books were circulated throughout the world, and some of them reached
the Emperor. He sat in his golden chair, and read and read. He nodded
his head every moment, for he liked reading the brilliant accounts of
the town, the Palace, and the garden. ‘But the Nightingale is better
than all,’ he saw written.

‘What is that?’ said the Emperor. ‘I don’t know anything about the
Nightingale! Is there such a bird in my empire, and so near as in my
garden? I have never heard it! Fancy reading for the first time about it
in a book!’

And he called his First Lord to him. He was so proud that if anyone of
lower rank than his own ventured to speak to him or ask him anything, he
would say nothing but ‘P!’ and that does not mean anything.

‘Here is a most remarkable bird which is called a Nightingale!’ said the
Emperor. ‘They say it is the most glorious thing in my kingdom. Why has
no one ever said anything to me about it?’

‘I have never before heard it mentioned!’ said the First Lord. ‘I will
look for it and find it!’

But where was it to be found? The First Lord ran up and down stairs,
through the halls and corridors; but none of those he met had ever heard
of the Nightingale. And the First Lord ran again to the Emperor, and
told him that it must be an invention on the part of those who had
written the books.

‘Your Imperial Majesty cannot really believe all that is written! There
are some inventions called the Black Art!’

‘But the book in which I read this,’ said the Emperor, ‘is sent me by
His Great Majesty the Emperor of Japan; so it cannot be untrue, and I
will hear the Nightingale! She must be here this evening! She has my
gracious permission to appear, and if she does not, the whole Court
shall be trampled under foot after supper!’

‘Tsing pe!’ said the First Lord; and he ran up and down stairs, through
the halls and corridors, and half the Court ran with him, for they
did not want to be trampled under foot. Everyone was asking after the
wonderful Nightingale which all the world knew of, except those at
Court.

At last they met a poor little girl in the kitchen, who said, ‘Oh! I
know the Nightingale well. How she sings! I have permission to carry the
scraps over from the Court meals to my poor sick mother, and when I am
going home at night, tired and weary, and rest for a little in the wood,
then I hear the Nightingale singing! It brings tears to my eyes, and I
feel as if my mother were kissing me!’

‘Little kitchenmaid!’ said the First Lord, ‘I will give you a place in
the kitchen, and you shall have leave to see the Emperor at dinner, if
you can lead us to the Nightingale, for she is invited to come to Court
this evening.’

And so they all went into the wood where the Nightingale was wont to
sing, and half the Court went too.

When they were on the way there they heard a cow mooing.

‘Oh!’ said the Courtiers, ‘now we have found her! What a wonderful power
for such a small beast to have! I am sure we have heard her before!’

‘No; that is a cow mooing!’ said the little kitchenmaid. ‘We are still a
long way off!’

Then the frogs began to croak in the marsh. ‘Splendid!’ said the Chinese
chaplain. ‘Now we hear her; it sounds like a little church-bell!’

‘No, no; those are frogs!’ said the little kitchenmaid. ‘But I think we
shall soon hear her now!’

Then the Nightingale began to sing.

‘There she is!’ cried the little girl. ‘Listen! She is sitting there!’
And she pointed to a little dark-grey bird up in the branches.

‘Is it possible!’ said the First Lord. ‘I should never have thought it!
How ordinary she looks! She must surely have lost her feathers because
she sees so many distinguished men round her!’

‘Little Nightingale,’ called out the little kitchenmaid, ‘our Gracious
Emperor wants you to sing before him!’

‘With the greatest of pleasure!’ said the Nightingale; and she sang so
gloriously that it was a pleasure to listen.

‘It sounds like glass bells!’ said the First Lord. ‘And look how her
little throat works! It is wonderful that we have never heard her
before! She will be a great success at Court.’

‘Shall I sing once more for the Emperor?’ asked the Nightingale,
thinking that the Emperor was there.

‘My esteemed little Nightingale,’ said the First Lord, ‘I have the
great pleasure to invite you to Court this evening, where His Gracious
Imperial Highness will be enchanted with your charming song!’

‘It sounds best in the green wood,’ said the Nightingale; but still, she
came gladly when she heard that the Emperor wished it.

At the Palace everything was splendidly prepared. The porcelain walls
and floors glittered in the light of many thousand gold lamps; the most
gorgeous flowers which tinkled out well were placed in the corridors.
There was such a hurrying and draught that all the bells jingled so much
that one could not hear oneself speak. In the centre of the great hall
where the Emperor sat was a golden perch, on which the Nightingale sat.
The whole Court was there, and the little kitchenmaid was allowed to
stand behind the door, now that she was a Court-cook. Everyone was
dressed in his best, and everyone was looking towards the little grey
bird to whom the Emperor nodded.

The Nightingale sang so gloriously that the tears came into the
Emperor’s eyes and ran down his cheeks. Then the Nightingale sang even
more beautifully; it went straight to all hearts. The Emperor was so
delighted that he said she should wear his gold slipper round her neck.
But the Nightingale thanked him, and said she had had enough reward
already. ‘I have seen tears in the Emperor’s eyes--that is a great
reward. An Emperor’s tears have such power!’ Then she sang again with
her gloriously sweet voice.

‘That is the most charming coquetry I have ever seen!’ said all the
ladies round. And they all took to holding water in their mouths that
they might gurgle whenever anyone spoke to them. Then they thought
themselves nightingales. Yes, the lackeys and chambermaids announced
that they were pleased; which means a great deal, for they are the most
difficult people of all to satisfy. In short, the Nightingale was a real
success.

She had to stay at Court now; she had her own cage, and permission to
walk out twice in the day and once at night.

She was given twelve servants, who each held a silken string which was
fastened round her leg. There was little pleasure in flying about like
this.

The whole town was talking about the wonderful bird, and when two people
met each other one would say ‘Nightin,’ and the other ‘Gale,’ and then
they would both sigh and understand one another.

Yes, and eleven grocer’s children were called after her, but not one of
them could sing a note.

One day the Emperor received a large parcel on which was written ‘The
Nightingale.’

‘Here is another new book about our famous bird!’ said the Emperor.

But it was not a book, but a little mechanical toy, which lay in a
box--an artificial nightingale which was like the real one, only that it
was set all over with diamonds, rubies, and sapphires. When it was wound
up, it could sing the piece the real bird sang, and moved its tail
up and down, and glittered with silver and gold. Round its neck was a
little collar on which was written, ‘The Nightingale of the Emperor of
Japan is nothing compared to that of the Emperor of China.’

‘This is magnificent!’ they all said, and the man who had brought
the clockwork bird received on the spot the title of ‘Bringer of the
Imperial First Nightingale.’

‘Now they must sing together; what a duet we shall have!’

And so they sang together, but their voices did not blend, for the real
Nightingale sang in her way and the clockwork bird sang waltzes.

‘It is not its fault!’ said the bandmaster; ‘it keeps very good time and
is quite after my style!’

Then the artificial bird had to sing alone. It gave just as much
pleasure as the real one, and then it was so much prettier to look at;
it sparkled like bracelets and necklaces. Three-and-thirty times it sang
the same piece without being tired. People would like to have heard it
again, but the Emperor thought that the living Nightingale should sing
now--but where was she? No one had noticed that she had flown out of the
open window away to her green woods.

‘What SHALL we do!’ said the Emperor.

And all the Court scolded, and said that the Nightingale was very
ungrateful. ‘But we have still the best bird!’ they said and the
artificial bird had to sing again, and that was the thirty-fourth time
they had heard the same piece. But they did not yet know it by heart;
it was much too difficult. And the bandmaster praised the bird
tremendously; yes, he assured them it was better than a real
nightingale, not only because of its beautiful plumage and diamonds, but
inside as well. ‘For see, my Lords and Ladies and your Imperial Majesty,
with the real Nightingale one can never tell what will come out, but all
is known about the artificial bird! You can explain it, you can open it
and show people where the waltzes lie, how they go, and how one follows
the other!’

‘That’s just what we think!’ said everyone; and the bandmaster received
permission to show the bird to the people the next Sunday. They should
hear it sing, commanded the Emperor. And they heard it, and they were
as pleased as if they had been intoxicated with tea, after the Chinese
fashion, and they all said ‘Oh!’ and held up their forefingers and
nodded time. But the poor fishermen who had heard the real Nightingale
said: ‘This one sings well enough, the tunes glide out; but there is
something wanting--I don’t know what!’

The real Nightingale was banished from the kingdom.

The artificial bird was put on silken cushions by the Emperor’s bed, all
the presents which it received, gold and precious stones, lay round
it, and it was given the title of Imperial Night-singer, First from the
left. For the Emperor counted that side as the more distinguished, being
the side on which the heart is; the Emperor’s heart is also on the left.

And the bandmaster wrote a work of twenty-five volumes about the
artificial bird. It was so learned, long, and so full of the hardest
Chinese words that everyone said they had read it and understood it; for
once they had been very stupid about a book, and had been trampled under
foot in consequence. So a whole year passed. The Emperor, the Court, and
all the Chinese knew every note of the artificial bird’s song by heart.
But they liked it all the better for this; they could even sing with
it, and they did. The street boys sang ‘Tra-la-la-la-la, and the Emperor
sang too sometimes. It was indeed delightful.

But one evening, when the artificial bird was singing its best, and the
Emperor lay in bed listening to it, something in the bird went crack.
Something snapped! Whir-r-r! all the wheels ran down and then the music
ceased. The Emperor sprang up, and had his physician summoned, but
what could HE do! Then the clockmaker came, and, after a great deal of
talking and examining, he put the bird somewhat in order, but he said
that it must be very seldom used as the works were nearly worn out, and
it was impossible to put in new ones. Here was a calamity! Only once a
year was the artificial bird allowed to sing, and even that was almost
too much for it. But then the bandmaster made a little speech full
of hard words, saying that it was just as good as before. And so, of
course, it WAS just as good as before. So five years passed, and then a
great sorrow came to the nation. The Chinese look upon their Emperor as
everything, and now he was ill, and not likely to live it was said.

Already a new Emperor had been chosen, and the people stood outside in
the street and asked the First Lord how the old Emperor was. ‘P!’ said
he, and shook his head.

Cold and pale lay the Emperor in his splendid great bed; the whole
Court believed him dead, and one after the other left him to pay their
respects to the new Emperor. Everywhere in the halls and corridors cloth
was laid down so that no footstep could be heard, and everything was
still--very, very still. And nothing came to break the silence.

The Emperor longed for something to come and relieve the monotony of
this deathlike stillness. If only someone would speak to him! If only
someone would sing to him. Music would carry his thoughts away, and
would break the spell lying on him. The moon was streaming in at the
open window; but that, too, was silent, quite silent.

‘Music! music!’ cried the Emperor. ‘You little bright golden bird, sing!
do sing! I gave you gold and jewels; I have hung my gold slipper round
your neck with my own hand--sing! do sing!’ But the bird was silent.
There was no one to wind it up, and so it could not sing. And all was
silent, so terribly silent!

All at once there came in at the window the most glorious burst of song.
It was the little living Nightingale, who, sitting outside on a bough,
had heard the need of her Emperor and had come to sing to him of comfort
and hope. And as she sang the blood flowed quicker and quicker in the
Emperor’s weak limbs, and life began to return.

‘Thank you, thank you!’ said the Emperor. ‘You divine little bird!
I know you. I chased you from my kingdom, and you have given me life
again! How can I reward you?’

‘You have done that already!’ said the Nightingale. ‘I brought tears
to your eyes the first time I sang. I shall never forget that. They
are jewels that rejoice a singer’s heart. But now sleep and get strong
again; I will sing you a lullaby.’ And the Emperor fell into a deep,
calm sleep as she sang.

The sun was shining through the window when he awoke, strong and well.
None of his servants had come back yet, for they thought he was dead.
But the Nightingale sat and sang to him.

‘You must always stay with me!’ said the Emperor. ‘You shall sing
whenever you like, and I will break the artificial bird into a thousand
pieces.’

‘Don’t do that!’ said the Nightingale. ‘He did his work as long as he
could. Keep him as you have done! I cannot build my nest in the Palace
and live here; but let me come whenever I like. I will sit in the
evening on the bough outside the window, and I will sing you something
that will make you feel happy and grateful. I will sing of joy, and of
sorrow; I will sing of the evil and the good which lies hidden from you.
The little singing-bird flies all around, to the poor fisherman’s hut,
to the farmer’s cottage, to all those who are far away from you and your
Court. I love your heart more than your crown, though that has about it
a brightness as of something holy. Now I will sing to you again; but you
must promise me one thing----’

‘Anything!’ said the Emperor, standing up in his Imperial robes, which
he had himself put on, and fastening on his sword richly embossed with
gold.

‘One thing I beg of you! Don’t tell anyone that you have a little bird
who tells you everything. It will be much better not to!’ Then the
Nightingale flew away.

The servants came in to look at their dead Emperor.

The Emperor said, ‘Good-morning!’




HERMOD AND HADVOR (32)

(32) From the Icelandic.

Once upon a time there were a King and a Queen who had an only daughter,
called Hadvor, who was fair and beautiful, and being an only child, was
heir to the kingdom. The King and Queen had also a foster son, named
Hermod, who was just about the same age as Hadvor, and was good-looking,
as well as clever at most things. Hermod and Hadvor often played
together while they were children, and liked each other so much that
while they were still young they secretly plighted their troth to each
other.

As time went on the Queen fell sick, and suspecting that it was her last
illness, sent for the King to come to her. When he came she told him
that she had no long time to live, and therefore wished to ask one thing
of him, which was, that if he married another wife he should promise to
take no other one than the Queen of Hetland the Good. The King gave the
promise, and thereafter the Queen died.

Time went past, and the King, growing tired of living alone, fitted
out his ship and sailed out to sea. As he sailed there came upon him
so thick a mist that he altogether lost his bearings, but after long
trouble he found land. There he laid his ship to, and went on shore all
alone. After walking for some time he came to a forest, into which he
went a little way and stopped. Then he heard sweet music from a harp,
and went in the direction of the sound until he came to a clearing, and
there he saw three women, one of whom sat on a golden chair, and was
beautifully and grandly dressed; she held a harp in her hands, and
was very sorrowful. The second was also finely dressed, but younger
in appearance, and also sat on a chair, but it was not so grand as the
first one’s. The third stood beside them, and was very pretty to look
at; she had a green cloak over her other clothes, and it was easy to see
that she was maid to the other two.

After the King had looked at them for a little he went forward and
saluted them. The one that sat on the golden chair asked him who he
was and where he was going; and he told her all the story--how he was
a king, and had lost his queen, and was now on his way to Hetland the
Good, to ask the Queen of that country in marriage. She answered that
fortune had contrived this wonderfully, for pirates had plundered
Hetland and killed the King, and she had fled from the land in terror,
and had come hither after great trouble, and she was the very person
he was looking for, and the others were her daughter and maid. The
King immediately asked her hand; she gladly received his proposal and
accepted him at once. Thereafter they all set out, and made their way to
the ship; and after that nothing is told of their voyage until the King
reached his own country. There he made a great feast, and celebrated his
marriage with this woman; and after that things are quiet for a time.

Hermod and Hadvor took but little notice of the Queen and her daughter,
but, on the other hand, Hadvor and the Queen’s maid, whose name was
Olof, were very friendly, and Olof came often to visit Hadvor in her
castle. Before long the King went out to war, and no sooner was he away
than the Queen came to talk with Hermod, and said that she wanted him to
marry her daughter. Hermod told her straight and plain that he would
not do so, at which the Queen grew terribly angry, and said that in that
case neither should he have Hadvor, for she would now lay this spell on
him, that he should go to a desert island and there be a lion by day and
a man by night. He should also think always of Hadvor, which would cause
him all the more sorrow, and from this spell he should never be freed
until Hadvor burned the lion’s skin, and that would not happen very
soon.

As soon as the Queen had finished her speech Hermod replied that he also
laid a spell on her, and that was, that as soon as he was freed from her
enchantments she should become a rat and her daughter a mouse, and fight
with each other in the hall until he killed them with his sword.

After this Hermod disappeared, and no one knew what had become of him;
the Queen caused search to be made for him, but he could nowhere be
found. One time, when Olof was in the castle beside Hadvor, she asked
the Princess if she knew where Hermod had gone to. At this Hadvor became
very sad, and said that she did not.

‘I shall tell you then,’ said Olof, ‘for I know all about it. Hermod has
disappeared through the wicked devices of the Queen, for she is a witch,
and so is her daughter, though they have put on these beautiful forms.
Because Hermod would not fall in with the Queen’s plans, and marry her
daughter, she has laid a spell on him, to go on an island and be a lion
by day and a man by night, and never be freed from this until you burn
the lion’s skin. Besides,’ said Olof, ‘she has looked out a match for
you; she has a brother in the Underworld, a three-headed Giant, whom she
means to turn into a beautiful prince and get him married to you. This
is no new thing for the Queen; she took me away from my parents’ house
and compelled me to serve her; but she has never done me any harm, for
the green cloak I wear protects me against all mischief.

Hadvor now became still sadder than before at the thought of the
marriage destined for her, and entreated Olof to think of some plan to
save her.

‘I think,’ said Olof, ‘that your wooer will come up through the floor of
the castle to you, and so you must be prepared when you hear the noise
of his coming and the floor begins to open, and have at hand blazing
pitch, and pour plenty of it into the opening. That will prove too much
for him.’

About this time the King came home from his expedition, and thought it
a great blow that no one knew what had become of Hermod; but the Queen
consoled him as best she could, and after a time the King thought less
about his disappearance.

Hadvor remained in her castle, and had made preparations to receive her
wooer when he came. One night, not long after, a loud noise and rumbling
was heard under the castle. Hadvor at once guessed what it was, and told
her maids to be ready to help her. The noise and thundering grew louder
and louder, until the floor began to open, whereupon Hadvor made them
take the caldron of pitch and pour plenty of it into the opening. With
that the noises grew fainter and fainter, till at last they ceased
altogether.

Next morning the Queen rose early, and went out to the Palace gate, and
there she found her brother the Giant lying dead. She went up to him and
said, ‘I pronounce this spell, that you become a beautiful prince, and
that Hadvor shall be unable to say anything against the charges that I
shall bring against her.’

The body of the dead Giant now became that of a beautiful prince, and
the Queen went in again.

‘I don’t think,’ said she to the King, ‘that your daughter is as good as
she is said to be. My brother came and asked her hand, and she has had
him put to death. I have just found his dead body lying at the Palace
gate.’

The King went along with the Queen to see the body, and thought it all
very strange; so beautiful a youth, he said, would have been a worthy
match for Hadvor, and he would readily have agreed to their marriage.
The Queen asked leave to decide what Hadvor’s punishment should be,
which the King was very willing to allow, so as to escape from punishing
his own daughter. The Queen’s decision was that the King should make a
big grave-mound for her brother, and put Hadvor into it beside him.

Olof knew all the plans of the Queen, and went to tell the Princess what
had been done, whereupon Hadvor earnestly entreated her to tell her what
to do.

‘First and foremost,’ said Olof, ‘you must get a wide cloak to wear over
your other clothes, when you are put into the mound. The Giant’s ghost
will walk after you are both left together in there, and he will have
two dogs along with him. He will ask you to cut pieces out of his legs
to give to the dogs, but that you must not promise to do unless he tells
you where Hermod has gone to, and tells you how to find him. He will
then let you stand on his shoulders, so as to get out of the mound; but
he means to cheat you all the same, and will catch you by the cloak to
pull you back again; but you must take care to have the cloak loose on
your shoulders, so that he will only get hold of that.’

The mound was all ready now, and the Giant laid in it, and into it
Hadvor also had to go without being allowed to make any defence. After
they were both left there everything happened just as Olof had said. The
prince became a Giant again, and asked Hadvor to cut the pieces out of
his legs for the dogs; but she refused until he told her that Hermod was
in a desert island, which she could not reach unless she took the skin
off the soles of his feet and made shoes out of that; with these shoes
she could travel both on land and sea. This Hadvor now did, and the
Giant then let her get up on his shoulders to get out of the mound. As
she sprang out he caught hold of her cloak; but she had taken care to
let it lie loose on her shoulders, and so escaped.

She now made her way down to the sea, to where she knew there was the
shortest distance over to the island in which Hermod was. This strait
she easily crossed, for the shoes kept her up. On reaching the island
she found a sandy beach all along by the sea, and high cliffs above. Nor
could she see any way to get up these, and so, being both sad at heart
and tired with the long journey, she lay down and fell asleep. As she
slept she dreamed that a tall woman came to her and said, ‘I know that
you are Princess Hadvor, and are searching for Hermod. He is on this
island; but it will be hard for you to get to him if you have no one to
help you, for you cannot climb the cliffs by your own strength. I have
therefore let down a rope, by which you will be able to climb up; and as
the island is so large that you might not find Hermod’s dwelling-place
so easily, I lay down this clew beside you. You need only hold the end
of the thread, and the clew will run on before and show you the way. I
also lay this belt beside you, to put on when you awaken; it will keep
you from growing faint with hunger.’

The woman now disappeared, and Hadvor woke, and saw that all her dream
had been true. The rope hung down from the cliff, and the clew and belt
lay beside her. The belt she put on, the rope enabled her to climb up
the cliff, and the clew led her on till she came to the mouth of a cave,
which was not very big. She went into the cave, and saw there a low
couch, under which she crept and lay down.

When evening came she heard the noise of footsteps outside, and became
aware that the lion had come to the mouth of the cave, and shook itself
there, after which she heard a man coming towards the couch. She was
sure this was Hermod, because she heard him speaking to himself about
his own condition, and calling to mind Hadvor and other things in the
old days. Hadvor made no sign, but waited till he had fallen asleep, and
then crept out and burned the lion’s skin, which he had left outside.
Then she went back into the cave and wakened Hermod, and they had a most
joyful meeting.

In the morning they talked over their plans, and were most at a loss
to know how to get out of the island. Hadvor told Hermod her dream, and
said she suspected there was some one in the island who would be able to
help them. Hermod said he knew of a Witch there, who was very ready to
help anyone, and that the only plan was to go to her. So they went to
the Witch’s cave, and found her there with her fifteen young sons, and
asked her to help them to get to the mainland.

‘There are other things easier than that,’ said she, ‘for the Giant that
was buried will be waiting for you, and will attack you on the way,
as he has turned himself into a big whale. I shall lend you a boat,
however, and if you meet the whale and think your lives are in danger,
then you can name me by name.’

They thanked her greatly for her help and advice, and set out from the
island, but on the way they saw a huge fish coming towards them, with
great splashing and dashing of waves. They were sure of what it was, and
thought they had as good reason as ever they would have to call on
the Witch, and so they did. The next minute they saw coming after them
another huge whale, followed by fifteen smaller ones. All of these swam
past the boat and went on to meet the whale. There was a fierce battle
then, and the sea became so stormy that it was not very easy to keep the
boat from being filled by the waves. After this fight had gone on for
some time, they saw that the sea was dyed with blood; the big whale
and the fifteen smaller ones disappeared, and they got to land safe and
sound.

Now the story goes back to the King’s hall, where strange things had
happened in the meantime. The Queen and her daughter had disappeared,
but a rat and a mouse were always fighting with each other there. Ever
so many people had tried to drive them away, but no one could manage it.
Thus some time went on, while the King was almost beside himself with
sorrow and care for the loss of his Queen, and because these monsters
destroyed all mirth in the hall.

One evening, however, while they all sat dull and down-hearted, in came
Hermod with a sword by his side, and saluted the King, who received
him with the greatest joy, as if he had come back from the dead. Before
Hermod sat down, however, he went to where the rat and the mouse were
fighting, and cut them in two with his sword. All were astonished then
by seeing two witches lying dead on the floor of the hall.

Hermod now told the whole story to the King, who was very glad to be rid
of such vile creatures. Next he asked for the hand of Hadvor, which the
King readily gave him, and being now an old man, gave the kingdom to him
as well; and so Hermod became King.

Olof married a good-looking nobleman, and that is the end of the story.




THE STEADFAST TIN-SOLDIER

There were once upon a time five-and twenty tin-soldiers--all brothers,
as they were made out of the same old tin spoon. Their uniform was red
and blue, and they shouldered their guns and looked straight in front of
them. The first words that they heard in this world, when the lid of the
box in which they lay was taken off, were: ‘Hurrah, tin-soldiers!’ This
was exclaimed by a little boy, clapping his hands; they had been given
to him because it was his birthday, and now he began setting them out on
the table. Each soldier was exactly like the other in shape, except just
one, who had been made last when the tin had run short; but there he
stood as firmly on his one leg as the others did on two, and he is the
one that became famous.

There were many other playthings on the table on which they were being
set out, but the nicest of all was a pretty little castle made of
cardboard, with windows through which you could see into the rooms. In
front of the castle stood some little trees surrounding a tiny mirror
which looked like a lake. Wax swans were floating about and reflecting
themselves in it. That was all very pretty; but the most beautiful thing
was a little lady, who stood in the open doorway. She was cut out of
paper, but she had on a dress of the finest muslin, with a scarf of
narrow blue ribbon round her shoulders, fastened in the middle with a
glittering rose made of gold paper, which was as large as her head. The
little lady was stretching out both her arms, for she was a Dancer, and
was lifting up one leg so high in the air that the Tin-soldier couldn’t
find it anywhere, and thought that she, too, had only one leg.

‘That’s the wife for me!’ he thought; ‘but she is so grand, and lives in
a castle, whilst I have only a box with four-and-twenty others. This is
no place for her! But I must make her acquaintance.’ Then he stretched
himself out behind a snuff-box that lay on the table; from thence he
could watch the dainty little lady, who continued to stand on one leg
without losing her balance.

When the night came all the other tin-soldiers went into their box,
and the people of the house went to bed. Then the toys began to play at
visiting, dancing, and fighting. The tin-soldiers rattled in their box,
for they wanted to be out too, but they could not raise the lid. The
nut-crackers played at leap-frog, and the slate-pencil ran about the
slate; there was such a noise that the canary woke up and began to talk
to them, in poetry too! The only two who did not stir from their places
were the Tin-soldier and the little Dancer. She remained on tip-toe,
with both arms outstretched; he stood steadfastly on his one leg, never
moving his eyes from her face.

The clock struck twelve, and crack! off flew the lid of the snuff-box;
but there was no snuff inside, only a little black imp--that was the
beauty of it.

‘Hullo, Tin-soldier!’ said the imp. ‘Don’t look at things that aren’t
intended for the likes of you!’

But the Tin-soldier took no notice, and seemed not to hear.

‘Very well, wait till to-morrow!’ said the imp.

When it was morning, and the children had got up, the Tin-soldier was
put in the window; and whether it was the wind or the little black imp,
I don’t know, but all at once the window flew open and out fell the
little Tin-soldier, head over heels, from the third-storey window! That
was a terrible fall, I can tell you! He landed on his head with his leg
in the air, his gun being wedged between two paving-stones.

The nursery-maid and the little boy came down at once to look for him,
but, though they were so near him that they almost trod on him, they did
not notice him. If the Tin-soldier had only called out ‘Here I am!’ they
must have found him; but he did not think it fitting for him to cry out,
because he had on his uniform.

Soon it began to drizzle; then the drops came faster, and there was a
regular down-pour. When it was over, two little street boys came along.

‘Just look!’ cried one. ‘Here is a Tin-soldier! He shall sail up and
down in a boat!’

So they made a little boat out of newspaper, put the Tin-soldier in it,
and made him sail up and down the gutter; both the boys ran along beside
him, clapping their hands. What great waves there were in the gutter,
and what a swift current! The paper-boat tossed up and down, and in the
middle of the stream it went so quick that the Tin-soldier trembled; but
he remained steadfast, showed no emotion, looked straight in front
of him, shouldering his gun. All at once the boat passed under a long
tunnel that was as dark as his box had been.

‘Where can I be coming now?’ he wondered. ‘Oh, dear! This is the black
imp’s fault! Ah, if only the little lady were sitting beside me in the
boat, it might be twice as dark for all I should care!’

Suddenly there came along a great water-rat that lived in the tunnel.

‘Have you a passport?’ asked the rat. ‘Out with your passport!’

But the Tin-soldier was silent, and grasped his gun more firmly.

The boat sped on, and the rat behind it. Ugh! how he showed his teeth,
as he cried to the chips of wood and straw: ‘Hold him, hold him! he has
not paid the toll! He has not shown his passport!’

But the current became swifter and stronger. The Tin-soldier could
already see daylight where the tunnel ended; but in his ears there
sounded a roaring enough to frighten any brave man. Only think! at the
end of the tunnel the gutter discharged itself into a great canal; that
would be just as dangerous for him as it would be for us to go down a
waterfall.

Now he was so near to it that he could not hold on any longer. On went
the boat, the poor Tin-soldier keeping himself as stiff as he could: no
one should say of him afterwards that he had flinched. The boat whirled
three, four times round, and became filled to the brim with water: it
began to sink! The Tin-soldier was standing up to his neck in water, and
deeper and deeper sank the boat, and softer and softer grew the paper;
now the water was over his head. He was thinking of the pretty little
Dancer, whose face he should never see again, and there sounded in his
ears, over and over again:

          ‘Forward, forward, soldier bold!
           Death’s before thee, grim and cold!’

The paper came in two, and the soldier fell--but at that moment he was
swallowed by a great fish.

Oh! how dark it was inside, even darker than in the tunnel, and it was
really very close quarters! But there the steadfast little Tin-soldier
lay full length, shouldering his gun.

Up and down swam the fish, then he made the most dreadful contortions,
and became suddenly quite still. Then it was as if a flash of lightning
had passed through him; the daylight streamed in, and a voice exclaimed,
‘Why, here is the little Tin-soldier!’ The fish had been caught, taken
to market, sold, and brought into the kitchen, where the cook had cut it
open with a great knife. She took up the soldier between her finger and
thumb, and carried him into the room, where everyone wanted to see the
hero who had been found inside a fish; but the Tin-soldier was not at
all proud. They put him on the table, and--no, but what strange things
do happen in this world!--the Tin-soldier was in the same room in which
he had been before! He saw the same children, and the same toys on
the table; and there was the same grand castle with the pretty little
Dancer. She was still standing on one leg with the other high in the
air; she too was steadfast. That touched the Tin-soldier, he was nearly
going to shed tin-tears; but that would not have been fitting for a
soldier. He looked at her, but she said nothing.

All at once one of the little boys took up the Tin-soldier, and threw
him into the stove, giving no reasons; but doubtless the little black
imp in the snuff-box was at the bottom of this too.

There the Tin-soldier lay, and felt a heat that was truly terrible; but
whether he was suffering from actual fire, or from the ardour of his
passion, he did not know. All his colour had disappeared; whether this
had happened on his travels or whether it was the result of trouble, who
can say? He looked at the little lady, she looked at him, and he felt
that he was melting; but he remained steadfast, with his gun at his
shoulder. Suddenly a door opened, the draught caught up the little
Dancer, and off she flew like a sylph to the Tin-soldier in the stove,
burst into flames--and that was the end of her! Then the Tin-soldier
melted down into a little lump, and when next morning the maid was
taking out the ashes, she found him in the shape of a heart. There was
nothing left of the little Dancer but her gilt rose, burnt as black as a
cinder.




BLOCKHEAD-HANS

Far away in the country lay an old manor-house where lived an old squire
who had two sons. They thought themselves so clever, that if they had
known only half of what they did know, it would have been quite enough.
They both wanted to marry the King’s daughter, for she had proclaimed
that she would have for her husband the man who knew best how to choose
his words.

Both prepared for the wooing a whole week, which was the longest time
allowed them; but, after all, it was quite long enough, for they both
had preparatory knowledge, and everyone knows how useful that is. One
knew the whole Latin dictionary and also three years’ issue of the daily
paper of the town off by heart, so that he could repeat it all backwards
or forwards as you pleased. The other had worked at the laws of
corporation, and knew by heart what every member of the corporation
ought to know, so that he thought he could quite well speak on State
matters and give his opinion. He understood, besides this, how to
embroider braces with roses and other flowers, and scrolls, for he was
very ready with his fingers.

‘I shall win the king’s daughter!’ they both cried.

Their old father gave each of them a fine horse; the one who knew the
dictionary and the daily paper by heart had a black horse, while the
other who was so clever at corporation law had a milk-white one. Then
they oiled the corners of their mouths so that they might be able to
speak more fluently. All the servants stood in the courtyard and saw
them mount their steeds, and here by chance came the third brother; for
the squire had three sons, but nobody counted him with his brothers,
for he was not so learned as they were, and he was generally called
‘Blockhead-Hans.’

‘Oh, oh!’ said Blockhead-Hans. ‘Where are you off to? You are in your
Sunday-best clothes!’

‘We are going to Court, to woo the Princess! Don’t you know what is
known throughout all the country side?’ And they told him all about it.

‘Hurrah! I’ll go to!’ cried Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed at
him and rode off.

‘Dear father!’ cried Blockhead-Hans, ‘I must have a horse too. What a
desire for marriage has seized me! If she will have me, she WILL have
me, and if she won’t have me, I will have her.’

‘Stop that nonsense!’ said the old man. ‘I will not give you a horse.
YOU can’t speak; YOU don’t know how to choose your words. Your brothers!
Ah! they are very different lads!’

‘Well,’ said Blockhead-Hans, ‘if I can’t have a horse, I will take the
goat which is mine; he can carry me!’

And he did so. He sat astride on the goat, struck his heels into its
side, and went rattling down the high-road like a hurricane.

‘Hoppetty hop! what a ride!’ Here I come!’ shouted Blockhead-Hans,
singing so that the echoes were roused far and near. But his brothers
were riding slowly in front. They were not speaking, but they were
thinking over all the good things they were going to say, for everything
had to be thought out.

‘Hullo!’ bawled Blockhead-Hans, ‘here I am! Just look what I found on
the road!’--and he showed them a dead crow which he had picked up.

‘Blockhead!’ said his brothers, ‘what are you going to do with it?’

‘With the crow? I shall give it to the Princess!’

‘Do so, certainly!’ they said, laughing loudly and riding on.

‘Slap! bang! here I am again! Look what I have just found! You don’t
find such things every day on the road!’ And the brothers turned round
to see what in the world he could have found.

‘Blockhead!’ said they, ‘that is an old wooden shoe without the top! Are
you going to send that, too, to the Princess?’

‘Of course I shall!’ returned Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed
and rode on a good way.

‘Slap! bang! here I am!’ cried Blockhead-Hans; ‘better and better--it is
really famous!’

‘What have you found now?’ asked the brothers.

‘Oh,’ said Blockhead-Hans, ‘it is really too good! How pleased the
Princess will be!’

‘Why!’ said the brothers, ‘this is pure mud, straight from the ditch.’

‘Of course it is!’ said Blockhead-Hans, ‘and it is the best kind! Look
how it runs through one’s fingers!’ and, so saying, he filled his pocket
with the mud.

But the brothers rode on so fast that dust and sparks flew all around,
and they reached the gate of the town a good hour before Blockhead-Hans.
Here came the suitors numbered according to their arrival, and they were
ranged in rows, six in each row, and they were so tightly packed
that they could not move their arms. This was a very good thing, for
otherwise they would have torn each other in pieces, merely because the
one was in front of the other.

All the country people were standing round the King’s throne, and were
crowded together in thick masses almost out of the windows to see the
Princess receive the suitors; and as each one came into the room all his
fine phrases went out like a candle!

‘It doesn’t matter!’ said the Princess. ‘Away! out with him!’

At last she came to the row in which the brother who knew the dictionary
by heart was, but he did not know it any longer; he had quite forgotten
it in the rank and file. And the floor creaked, and the ceiling was all
made of glass mirrors, so that he saw himself standing on his head, and
by each window were standing three reporters and an editor; and each
of them was writing down what was said, to publish it in the paper that
came out and was sold at the street corners for a penny. It was fearful,
and they had made up the fire so hot that it was grilling.

‘It is hot in here, isn’t it!’ said the suitor.

‘Of course it is! My father is roasting young chickens to-day!’ said the
Princess.

‘Ahem!’ There he stood like an idiot. He was not prepared for such a
speech; he did not know what to say, although he wanted to say something
witty. ‘Ahem!’

‘It doesn’t matter!’ said the Princess. ‘Take him out!’ and out he had
to go.

Now the other brother entered.

‘How hot it is!’ he said.

‘Of course! We are roasting young chickens to-day!’ remarked the
Princess.

‘How do you--um!’ he said, and the reporters wrote down. ‘How do
you--um.’

‘It doesn’t matter!’ said the Princess. ‘Take him out!’

Now Blockhead-Hans came in; he rode his goat right into the hall.

‘I say! How roasting hot it is here!’ said he.

‘Of course! I am roasting young chickens to-day!’ said the Princess.

‘That’s good!’ replied Blockhead-Hans; ‘then can I roast a crow with
them?’

‘With the greatest of pleasure!’ said the Princess; ‘but have you
anything you can roast them in? for I have neither pot nor saucepan.’

‘Oh, rather!’ said Blockhead-Hans. ‘Here is a cooking implement with tin
rings,’ and he drew out the old wooden shoe, and laid the crow in it.

‘That is quite a meal!’ said the Princess; ‘but where shall we get the
soup from?’

‘I’ve got that in my pocket!’ said Blockhead-Hans. ‘I have so much that
I can quite well throw some away!’ and he poured some mud out of his
pocket.

‘I like you!’ said the Princess. ‘You can answer, and you can speak, and
I will marry you; but do you know that every word which we are saying
and have said has been taken down and will be in the paper to-morrow?
By each window do you see there are standing three reporters and an
old editor, and this old editor is the worst, for he doesn’t understand
anything!’ but she only said this to tease Blockhead-Hans. And the
reporters giggled, and each dropped a blot of ink on the floor.

‘Ah! are those the great people?’ said Blockhead-Hans. ‘Then I will give
the editor the best!’ So saying, he turned his pockets inside out, and
threw the mud right in his face.

‘That was neatly done!’ said the Princess. ‘I couldn’t have done it; but
I will soon learn how to!’

Blockhead-Hans became King, got a wife and a crown, and sat on the
throne; and this we have still damp from the newspaper of the editor and
the reporters--and they are not to be believed for a moment.




A STORY ABOUT A DARNING-NEEDLE

There was once a Darning-needle who thought herself so fine that she
believed she was an embroidery-needle. ‘Take great care to hold me
tight!’ said the Darning-needle to the Fingers who were holding her.
‘Don’t let me fall! If I once fall on the ground I shall never be found
again, I am so fine!’

‘It is all right!’ said the Fingers, seizing her round the waist.

‘Look, I am coming with my train!’ said the Darning-needle as she drew a
long thread after her; but there was no knot at the end of the thread.

The Fingers were using the needle on the cook’s shoe. The upper leather
was unstitched and had to be sewn together.

‘This is common work!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘I shall never get
through it. I am breaking! I am breaking!’ And in fact she did break.
‘Didn’t I tell you so!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘I am too fine!’

‘Now she is good for nothing!’ said the Fingers; but they had to hold
her tight while the cook dropped some sealing-wax on the needle and
stuck it in the front of her dress.

‘Now I am a breast-pin!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘I always knew I
should be promoted. When one is something, one will become something!’
And she laughed to herself; you can never see when a Darning-needle is
laughing. Then she sat up as proudly as if she were in a State coach,
and looked all round her.

‘May I be allowed to ask if you are gold?’ she said to her neighbour,
the Pin. ‘You have a very nice appearance, and a peculiar head; but
it is too small! You must take pains to make it grow, for it is
not everyone who has a head of sealing-wax.’ And so saying the
Darning-needle raised herself up so proudly that she fell out of the
dress, right into the sink which the cook was rinsing out.

‘Now I am off on my travels!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘I do hope I
sha’n’t get lost!’ She did indeed get lost.

‘I am too fine for this world!’ said she as she lay in the gutter; ‘but
I know who I am, and that is always a little satisfaction!’

And the Darning-needle kept her proud bearing and did not lose her
good-temper.

All kinds of things swam over her--shavings, bits of straw, and scraps
of old newspapers.

‘Just look how they sail along!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘They don’t
know what is underneath them! Here I am sticking fast! There goes a
shaving thinking of nothing in the world but of itself, a mere chip!
There goes a straw--well, how it does twist and twirl, to be sure! Don’t
think so much about yourself, or you will be knocked against a stone.
There floats a bit of newspaper. What is written on it is long ago
forgotten, and yet how proud it is! I am sitting patient and quiet. I
know who I am, and that is enough for me!’

One day something thick lay near her which glittered so brightly that
the Darning-needle thought it must be a diamond. But it was a bit of
bottle-glass, and because it sparkled the Darning-needle spoke to it,
and gave herself out as a breast-pin.

‘No doubt you are a diamond?’

‘Yes, something of that kind!’ And each believed that the other was
something very costly; and they both said how very proud the world must
be of them.

‘I have come from a lady’s work-box,’ said Darning-needle, ‘and this
lady was a cook; she had five fingers on each hand; anything so proud as
these fingers I have never seen! And yet they were only there to take me
out of the work-box and to put me back again!’

‘Were they of noble birth, then?’ asked the bit of bottle-glass.

‘Of noble birth!’ said the Darning-needle; ‘no indeed, but proud! They
were five brothers, all called ‘’Fingers.’’ They held themselves proudly
one against the other, although they were of different sizes. The
outside one, the Thumb, was short and fat; he was outside the rank, and
had only one bend in his back, and could only make one bow; but he said
that if he were cut off from a man that he was no longer any use as
a soldier. Dip-into-everything, the second finger, dipped into sweet
things as well as sour things, pointed to the sun and the moon, and
guided the pen when they wrote. Longman, the third, looked at the others
over his shoulder. Goldband, the fourth, had a gold sash round his
waist; and little Playman did nothing at all, and was the more proud.
There was too much ostentation, and so I came away.’

‘And now we are sitting and shining here!’ said the bit of bottle-glass.

At that moment more water came into the gutter; it streamed over the
edges and washed the bit of bottle-glass away.

‘Ah! now he has been promoted!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘I remain here;
I am too fine. But that is my pride, which is a sign of respectability!’
And she sat there very proudly, thinking lofty thoughts.

‘I really believe I must have been born a sunbeam, I am so fine! It
seems to me as if the sunbeams were always looking under the water for
me. Ah, I am so fine that my own mother cannot find me! If I had my old
eye which broke off, I believe I could weep; but I can’t--it is not fine
to weep!’

One day two street-urchins were playing and wading in the gutter,
picking up old nails, pennies, and such things. It was rather dirty
work, but it was a great delight to them.

‘Oh, oh!’ cried out one, as he pricked himself with the Darning-needle;
‘he is a fine fellow though!’

‘I am not a fellow; I am a young lady!’ said the Darning-needle; but no
one heard. The sealing-wax had gone, and she had become quite black; but
black makes one look very slim, and so she thought she was even finer
than before.

‘Here comes an egg-shell sailing along!’ said the boys, and they stuck
the Darning-needle into the egg-shell.

‘The walls white and I black--what a pretty contrast it makes!’ said
the Darning-needle. ‘Now I can be seen to advantage! If only I am not
sea-sick! I should give myself up for lost!’

But she was not sea-sick, and did not give herself up.

‘It is a good thing to be steeled against sea-sickness; here one has
indeed an advantage over man! Now my qualms are over. The finer one is
the more one can beat.’

‘Crack!’ said the egg-shell as a wagon-wheel went over it.

‘Oh! how it presses!’ said the Darning-needle. ‘I shall indeed be
sea-sick now. I am breaking!’ But she did not break, although the
wagon-wheel went over her; she lay there at full length, and there she
may lie.
﻿THE LADY OF THE FOUNTAIN


KING ARTHUR was at Caerlleon upon Usk; and one day he sat in his chamber;
and with him were Owain the son of Urien, and Kynon the son of Clydno,
and Kai the son of Kyner; and Gwenhwyvar and her handmaidens at
needlework by the window.  And if it should be said that there was a
porter at Arthur’s palace, there was none.  Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr was
there, acting as porter, to welcome guests and strangers, and to receive
them with honour, and to inform them of the manners and customs of the
Court; and to direct those who came to the Hall or to the
presence-chamber, and those who came to take up their lodging.

In the centre of the chamber King Arthur sat upon a seat of green rushes,
over which was spread a covering of flame-coloured satin, and a cushion
of red satin was under his elbow.

Then Arthur spoke, “If I thought you would not disparage me,” said he, “I
would sleep while I wait for my repast; and you can entertain one another
with relating tales, and can obtain a flagon of mead and some meat from
Kai.”  And the King went to sleep.  And Kynon the son of Clydno asked Kai
for that which Arthur had promised them.  “I, too, will have the good
tale which he promised to me,” said Kai.  “Nay,” answered Kynon, “fairer
will it be for thee to fulfill Arthur’s behest, in the first place, and
then we will tell thee the best tale that we know.”  So Kai went to the
kitchen and to the mead-cellar, and returned bearing a flagon of mead and
a golden goblet, and a handful of skewers, upon which were broiled
collops of meat.  Then they ate the collops and began to drink the mead.
“Now,” said Kai, “it is time for you to give me my story.”  “Kynon,” said
Owain, “do thou pay to Kai the tale that is his due.”  “Truly,” said
Kynon, “thou are older, and art a better teller of tales, and hast seen
more marvellous things than I; do thou therefore pay Kai his tale.”
“Begin thyself,” quoth Owain, “with the best that thou knowest.”  “I will
do so,” answered Kynon.

“I was the only son of my mother and father, and I was exceedingly
aspiring, and my daring was very great.  I thought there was no
enterprise in the world too mighty for me, and after I had achieved all
the adventures that were in my own country, I equipped myself, and set
forth to journey through deserts and distant regions.  And at length it
chanced that I came to the fairest valley in the world, wherein were
trees of equal growth; and a river ran through the valley, and a path was
by the side of the river.  And I followed the path until mid-day, and
continued my journey along the remainder of the valley until the evening;
and at the extremity of a plain I came to a large and lustrous Castle, at
the foot of which was a torrent.  And I approached the Castle, and there
I beheld two youths with yellow curling hair, each with a frontlet of
gold upon his head, and clad in a garment of yellow satin, and they had
gold clasps upon their insteps.  In the hand of each of them was an ivory
bow, strung with the sinews of the stag; and their arrows had shafts of
the bone of the whale, and were winged with peacock’s feathers; the
shafts also had golden heads.  And they had daggers with blades of gold,
and with hilts of the bone of the whale.  And they were shooting their
daggers.

“And a little way from them I saw a man in the prime of life, with his
beard newly shorn, clad in a robe and a mantle of yellow satin; and round
the top of his mantle was a band of gold lace.  On his feet were shoes of
variegated leather, fastened by two bosses of gold.  When I saw him, I
went towards him and saluted him, and such was his courtesy that he no
sooner received my greeting than he returned it.  And he went with me
towards the Castle.  Now there were no dwellers in the Castle except
those who were in one hall.  And there I saw four-and-twenty damsels,
embroidering satin at a window.  And this I tell thee, Kai, that the
least fair of them was fairer than the fairest maid thou hast ever beheld
in the Island of Britain, and the least lovely of them was more lovely
than Gwenhwyvar, the wife of Arthur, when she has appeared loveliest at
the Offering, on the day of the Nativity, or at the feast of Easter.
They rose up at my coming, and six of them took my horse, and divested me
of my armour; and six others took my arms, and washed them in a vessel
until they were perfectly bright.  And the third six spread cloths upon
the tables and prepared meat.  And the fourth six took off my soiled
garments, and placed others upon me; namely, an under-vest and a doublet
of fine linen, and a robe, and a surcoat, and a mantle of yellow satin
with a broad gold band upon the mantle.  And they placed cushions both
beneath and around me, with coverings of red linen; and I sat down.  Now
the six maidens who had taken my horse, unharnessed him, as well as if
they had been the best squires in the Island of Britain.  Then, behold,
they brought bowls of silver wherein was water to wash, and towels of
linen, some green and some white; and I washed.  And in a little while
the man sat down to the table.  And I sat next to him, and below me sat
all the maidens, except those who waited on us.  And the table was of
silver, and the cloths upon the table were of linen; and no vessel was
served upon the table that was not either of gold or of silver, or of
buffalo-horn.  And our meat was brought to us.  And verily, Kai, I saw
there every sort of meat and every sort of liquor that I have ever seen
elsewhere; but the meat and the liquor were better served there than I
have ever seen them in any other place.

“Until the repast was half over, neither the man nor any one of the
damsels spoke a single word to me; but when the man perceived that it
would be more agreeable to me to converse than to eat any more, he began
to inquire of me who I was.  I said I was glad to find that there was
some one who would discourse with me, and that it was not considered so
great a crime at that Court for people to hold converse together.
‘Chieftain,’ said the man, ‘we would have talked to thee sooner, but we
feared to disturb thee during thy repast; now, however, we will
discourse.’  Then I told the man who I was, and what was the cause of my
journey; and said that I was seeking whether any one was superior to me,
or whether I could gain the mastery over all.  The man looked upon me,
and he smiled and said, ‘If I did not fear to distress thee too much, I
would show thee that which thou seekest.’  Upon this I became anxious and
sorrowful, and when the man perceived it, he said, ‘If thou wouldest
rather that I should show thee thy disadvantage than thine advantage, I
will do so.  Sleep here to-night, and in the morning arise early, and
take the road upwards through the valley until thou reachest the wood
through which thou camest hither.  A little way within the wood thou wilt
meet with a road branching off to the right, by which thou must proceed,
until thou comest to a large sheltered glade with a mound in the centre.
And thou wilt see a black man of great stature on the top of the mound.
He is not smaller in size than two of the men of this world.  He has but
one foot; and one eye in the middle of his forehead.  And he has a club
of iron, and it is certain that there are no two men in the world who
would not find their burden in that club.  And he is not a comely man,
but on the contrary he is exceedingly ill-favoured; and he is the
woodward of that wood.  And thou wilt see a thousand wild animals grazing
around him.  Inquire of him the way out of the glade, and he will reply
to thee briefly, and will point out the road by which thou shalt find
that which thou art in quest of.’

“And long seemed that night to me.  And the next morning I arose and
equipped myself, and mounted my horse, and proceeded straight through the
valley to the wood; and I followed the cross-road which the man had
pointed out to me, till at length I arrived at the glade.  And there was
I three times more astonished at the number of wild animals that I
beheld, than the man had said I should be.  And the black man was there,
sitting upon the top of the mound.  Huge of stature as the man had told
me that he was, I found him to exceed by far the description he had given
me of him.  As for the iron club which the man had told me was a burden
for two men, I am certain, Kai, that it would be a heavy weight for four
warriors to lift; and this was in the black man’s hand.  And he only
spoke to me in answer to my questions.  Then I asked him what power he
held over those animals. ‘I will show thee, little man,’ said he.  And he
took his club in his hand, and with it he struck a stag a great blow so
that he brayed vehemently, and at his braying the animals came together,
as numerous as the stars in the sky, so that it was difficult for me to
find room in the glade to stand among them.  There were serpents, and
dragons, and divers sorts of animals.  And he looked at them, and bade
them go and feed; and they bowed their heads, and did him homage as
vassals to their lord.

“Then the black man said to me, ‘Seest thou now, little man, what power I
hold over these animals?’  Then I inquired of him the way, and he became
very rough in his manner to me; however, he asked me whither I would go?
And when I told him who I was and what I sought, he directed me.  ‘Take,’
said he, ‘that path that leads towards the head of the glade, and ascend
the wooded steep until thou comest to its summit; and there thou wilt
find an open space like to a large valley, and in the midst of it a tall
tree, whose branches are greener than the greenest pine-trees.  Under
this tree is a fountain, and by the side of the fountain a marble slab,
and on the marble slab a silver bowl, attached by a chain of silver, so
that it may not be carried away.  Take the bowl and throw a bowlful of
water upon the slab, and thou wilt hear a mighty peal of thunder, so that
thou wilt think that heaven and earth are trembling with its fury.  With
the thunder there will come a shower so severe that it will be scarce
possible for thee to endure it and live.  And the shower will be of
hailstones; and after the shower, the weather will become fair, but every
leaf that was upon the tree will have been carried away by the shower.
Then a flight of birds will come and alight upon the tree; and in thine
own country thou didst never hear a strain so sweet as that which they
will sing.  And at the moment thou art most delighted with the song of
the birds, thou wilt hear a murmuring and complaining coming towards thee
along the valley.  And thou wilt see a knight upon a coal-black horse,
clothed in black velvet, and with a pennon of black linen upon his lance;
and he will ride unto thee to encounter thee with the utmost speed.  If
thou fleest from him he will overtake thee, and if thou abidest there, as
sure as thou art a mounted knight, he will leave thee on foot.  And if
thou dost not find trouble in that adventure, thou needest not seek it
during the rest of thy life.’

“So I journeyed on, until I reached the summit of the steep, and there I
found everything as the black man had described it to me.  And I went up
to the tree, and beneath it I saw the fountain, and by its side the
marble slab, and the silver bowl fastened by the chain.  Then I took the
bowl, and cast a bowlful of water upon the slab; and thereupon, behold,
the thunder came, much more violent than the black man had led me to
expect; and after the thunder came the shower; and of a truth I tell
thee, Kai, that there is neither man nor beast that can endure that
shower and live.  For not one of those hailstones would be stopped,
either by the flesh or by the skin, until it had reached the bone.  I
turned my horse’s flank towards the shower, and placed the beak of my
shield over his head and neck, while I held the upper part of it over my
own head.  And thus I withstood the shower.  When I looked on the tree
there was not a single leaf upon it, and then the sky became clear, and
with that, behold the birds lighted upon the tree, and sang.  And truly,
Kai, I never heard any melody equal to that, either before or since.  And
when I was most charmed with listening to the birds, lo, a murmuring
voice was heard through the valley, approaching me and saying, ‘Oh,
Knight, what has brought thee hither?  What evil have I done to thee,
that thou shouldst act towards me and my possessions as thou hast this
day?  Dost thou not know that the shower to-day has left in my dominions
neither man nor beast alive that was exposed to it?’  And thereupon,
behold, a Knight on a black horse appeared, clothed in jet-black velvet,
and with a tabard of black linen about him.  And we charged each other,
and, as the onset was furious, it was not long before I was overthrown.
Then the Knight passed the shaft of his lance through the bridle rein of
my horse, and rode off with the two horses, leaving me where I was.  And
he did not even bestow so much notice upon me as to imprison me, nor did
he despoil me of my arms.  So I returned along the road by which I had
come.  And when I reached the glade where the black man was, I confess to
thee, Kai, it is a marvel that I did not melt down into a liquid pool,
through the shame that I felt at the black man’s derision.  And that
night I came to the same castle where I had spent the night preceding.
And I was more agreeably entertained that night than I had been the night
before; and I was better feasted, and I conversed freely with the inmates
of the castle, and none of them alluded to my expedition to the fountain,
neither did I mention it to any; and I remained there that night.  When I
arose on the morrow, I found, ready saddled, a dark bay palfrey, with
nostrils as red as scarlet; and after putting on my armour, and leaving
there my blessing, I returned to my own Court.  And that horse I still
possess, and he is in the stable yonder.  And I declare that I would not
part with him for the best palfrey in the Island of Britain.

“Now of a truth, Kai, no man ever before confessed to an adventure so
much to his own discredit, and verily it seems strange to me, that
neither before nor since have I heard of any person besides myself who
knew of this adventure, and that the subject of it should exist within
King Arthur’s dominions, without any other person lighting upon it.”

“Now,” quoth Owain, “would it not be well to go and endeavour to discover
that place?”

“By the hand of my friend,” said Kai, “often dost thou utter that with
thy tongue which thou wouldst not make good with thy deeds.”

“In very truth,” said Gwenhwyvar, “it were better thou wert hanged, Kai,
than to use such uncourteous speech towards a man like Owain.”

“By the hand of my friend, good Lady,” said Kai, “thy praise of Owain is
not greater than mine.”

With that Arthur awoke, and asked if he had not been sleeping a little.

“Yes, Lord,” answered Owain, “thou hast slept awhile.”

“Is it time for us to go to meat?”

“It is, Lord,” said Owain.

Then the horn for washing was sounded, and the King and all his household
sat down to eat.  And when the meal was ended, Owain withdrew to his
lodging, and made ready his horse and his arms.

On the morrow, with the dawn of day, he put on his armour, and mounted
his charger, and travelled through distant lands and over desert
mountains.  And at length he arrived at the valley which Kynon had
described to him; and he was certain that it was the same that he sought.
And journeying along the valley by the side of the river, he followed its
course till he came to the plain and within sight of the Castle.  When he
approached the Castle, he saw the youths shooting their daggers in the
place where Kynon had seen them, and the yellow man, to whom the Castle
belonged, standing hard by.  And no sooner had Owain saluted the yellow
man than he was saluted by him in return.

And he went forward towards the Castle, and there he saw the chamber, and
when he had entered the chamber he beheld the maidens working at satin
embroidery, in chairs of gold.  And their beauty and their comeliness
seemed to Owain far greater than Kynon had represented to him.  And they
rose to wait upon Owain, as they had done to Kynon, and the meal which
they set before him gave more satisfaction to Owain than it had done to
Kynon.

About the middle of the repast, the yellow man asked Owain the object of
his journey.  And Owain made it known to him, and said, “I am in quest of
the Knight who guards the fountain.”  Upon this the yellow man smiled,
and said that he was as loth to point out that adventure to Owain as he
had been to Kynon.  However, he described the whole to Owain, and they
retired to rest.

The next morning Owain found his horse made ready for him by the damsels,
and he set forward and came to the glade where the black man was.  And
the stature of the black man seemed more wonderful to Owain than it had
done to Kynon, and Owain asked of him his road, and he showed it to him.
And Owain followed the road, as Kynon had done, till he came to the green
tree; and he beheld the fountain, and the slab beside the fountain, with
the bowl upon it.  And Owain took the bowl, and threw a bowlful of water
upon the slab.  And, lo, the thunder was heard, and after the thunder
came the shower, much more violent than Kynon had described, and after
the shower the sky became bright.  And when Owain looked at the tree,
there was not one leaf upon it.  And immediately the birds came, and
settled upon the tree, and sang.  And when their song was most pleasing
to Owain, he beheld a Knight coming towards him through the valley, and
he prepared to receive him; and encountered him violently.  Having broken
both their lances, they drew their swords, and fought blade to blade.
Then Owain struck the Knight a blow through his helmet, head-piece and
visor, and through the skin, and the flesh, and the bone, until it
wounded the very brain.  Then the black Knight felt that he had received
a mortal wound, upon which he turned his horse’s head, and fled.  And
Owain pursued him, and followed close upon him, although he was not near
enough to strike him with his sword.  Thereupon Owain descried a vast and
resplendent Castle.  And they came to the Castle gate.  And the black
Knight was allowed to enter, and the portcullis was let fall upon Owain;
and it struck his horse behind the saddle, and cut him in two, and
carried away the rowels of the spurs that were upon Owain’s heels.  And
the portcullis descended to the floor.  And the rowels of the spurs and
part of the horse were without, and Owain with the other part of the
horse remained between the two gates, and the inner gate was closed, so
that Owain could not go thence; and Owain was in a perplexing situation.
And while he was in this state, he could see through an aperture in the
gate, a street facing him, with a row of houses on each side.  And he
beheld a maiden, with yellow curling hair, and a frontlet of gold upon
her head; and she was clad in a dress of yellow satin, and on her feet
were shoes of variegated leather.  And she approached the gate, and
desired that it should be opened.  “Heaven knows, Lady,” said Owain, “it
is no more possible for me to open to thee from hence, than it is for
thee to set me free.”  “Truly,” said the damsel, “it is very sad that
thou canst not be released, and every woman ought to succour thee, for I
never saw one more faithful in the service of ladies than thou.  As a
friend thou art the most sincere, and as a lover the most devoted.
Therefore,” quoth she, “whatever is in my power to do for thy release, I
will do it.  Take this ring and put it on thy finger, with the stone
inside thy hand; and close thy hand upon the stone.  And as long as thou
concealest it, it will conceal thee.  When they have consulted together,
they will come forth to fetch thee, in order to put thee to death; and
they will be much grieved that they cannot find thee.  And I will await
thee on the horseblock yonder; and thou wilt be able to see me, though I
cannot see thee; therefore come and place thy hand upon my shoulder, that
I may know that thou art near me.  And by the way that I go hence, do
thou accompany me.”

Then she went away from Owain, and he did all that the maiden had told
him.  And the people of the Castle came to seek Owain, to put him to
death, and when they found nothing but the half of his horse, they were
sorely grieved.

And Owain vanished from among them, and went to the maiden, and placed
his hand upon her shoulder; whereupon she set off, and Owain followed
her, until they came to the door of a large and beautiful chamber, and
the maiden opened it, and they went in, and closed the door.  And Owain
looked around the chamber, and behold there was not even a single nail in
it that was not painted with gorgeous colours; and there was not a single
panel that had not sundry images in gold portrayed upon it.

The maiden kindled a fire, and took water in a silver bowl, and put a
towel of white linen on her shoulder, and gave Owain water to wash.  Then
she placed before him a silver table, inlaid with gold; upon which was a
cloth of yellow linen; and she brought him food.  And of a truth, Owain
had never seen any kind of meat that was not there in abundance, but it
was better cooked there than he had ever found it in any other place.
Nor did he ever see so excellent a display of meat and drink, as there.
And there was not one vessel from which he was served, that was not of
gold or of silver.  And Owain ate and drank, until late in the afternoon,
when lo, they heard a mighty clamour in the Castle; and Owain asked the
maiden what that outcry was.  “They are administering extreme unction,”
said she, “to the Nobleman who owns the Castle.”  And Owain went to
sleep.

The couch which the maiden had prepared for him was meet for Arthur
himself; it was of scarlet, and fur, and satin, and sendal, and fine
linen.  In the middle of the night they heard a woful outcry.  “What
outcry again is this?” said Owain.  “The Nobleman who owned the Castle is
now dead,” said the maiden.  And a little after daybreak, they heard an
exceeding loud clamour and wailing.  And Owain asked the maiden what was
the cause of it.  “They are bearing to the church the body of the
Nobleman who owned the Castle.”

And Owain rose up, and clothed himself, and opened a window of the
chamber, and looked towards the Castle; and he could see neither the
bounds, nor the extent of the hosts that filled the streets.  And they
were fully armed; and a vast number of women were with them, both on
horseback and on foot; and all the ecclesiastics in the city, singing.
And it seemed to Owain that the sky resounded with the vehemence of their
cries, and with the noise of the trumpets, and with the singing of the
ecclesiastics.  In the midst of the throng, he beheld the bier, over
which was a veil of white linen; and wax tapers were burning beside and
around it, and none that supported the bier was lower in rank than a
powerful Baron.

Never did Owain see an assemblage so gorgeous with satin, and silk, and
sendal.  And following the train, he beheld a lady with yellow hair
falling over her shoulders, and stained with blood; and about her a dress
of yellow satin, which was torn.  Upon her feet were shoes of variegated
leather.  And it was a marvel that the ends of her fingers were not
bruised, from the violence with which she smote her hands together.
Truly she would have been the fairest lady Owain ever saw, had she been
in her usual guise.  And her cry was louder than the shout of the men, or
the clamour of the trumpets.  No sooner had he beheld the lady, than he
became inflamed with her love, so that it took entire possession of him.

Then he inquired of the maiden who the lady was.  “Heaven knows,” replied
the maiden, “she may be said to be the fairest, and the most chaste, and
the most liberal, and the wisest, and the most noble of women.  And she
is my mistress; and she is called the Countess of the Fountain, the wife
of him whom thou didst slay yesterday.”  “Verily,” said Owain, “she is
the woman that I love best.”  “Verily,” said the maiden, “she shall also
love thee not a little.”

And with that the maid arose, and kindled a fire, and filled a pot with
water, and placed it to warm; and she brought a towel of white linen, and
placed it around Owain’s neck; and she took a goblet of ivory, and a
silver basin, and filled them with warm water, wherewith she washed
Owain’s head.  Then she opened a wooden casket, and drew forth a razor,
whose haft was of ivory, and upon which were two rivets of gold.  And she
shaved his beard, and she dried his head, and his throat, with the towel.
Then she rose up from before Owain, and brought him to eat.  And truly
Owain had never so good a meal, nor was he ever so well served.

When he had finished his repast, the maiden arranged his couch.  “Come
here,” said she, “and sleep, and I will go and woo for thee.”  And Owain
went to sleep, and the maiden shut the door of the chamber after her, and
went towards the Castle.  When she came there, she found nothing but
mourning, and sorrow; and the Countess in her chamber could not bear the
sight of any one through grief.  Luned came and saluted her, but the
Countess answered her not.  And the maiden bent down towards her, and
said, “What aileth thee, that thou answerest no one to-day?”  “Luned,”
said the Countess, “what change hath befallen thee, that thou hast not
come to visit me in my grief?  It was wrong in thee, and I having made
thee rich; it was wrong in thee that thou didst not come to see me in my
distress.  That was wrong in thee.”  “Truly,” said Luned, “I thought thy
good sense was greater than I find it to be.  Is it well for thee to
mourn after that good man, or for anything else, that thou canst not
have?”  “I declare to heaven,” said the Countess, “that in the whole
world there is not a man equal to him.”  “Not so,” said Luned, “for an
ugly man would be as good as, or better than he.”  “I declare to heaven,”
said the Countess, “that were it not repugnant to me to cause to be put
to death one whom I have brought up, I would have thee executed, for
making such a comparison to me.  As it is, I will banish thee.”  “I am
glad,” said Luned, “that thou hast no other cause to do so, than that I
would have been of service to thee where thou didst not know what was to
thine advantage.  And henceforth evil betide whichever of us shall make
the first advance towards reconciliation to the other; whether I should
seek an invitation from thee, or thou of thine own accord shouldst send
to invite me.”

With that Luned went forth: and the Countess arose and followed her to
the door of the chamber, and began coughing loudly.  And when Luned
looked back, the Countess beckoned to her; and she returned to the
Countess.  “In truth,” said the Countess, “evil is thy disposition; but
if thou knowest what is to my advantage, declare it to me.”  “I will do
so,” quoth she.

“Thou knowest that except by warfare and arms it is impossible for thee
to preserve thy possessions; delay not, therefore, to seek some one who
can defend them.”  “And how can I do that?” said the Countess.  “I will
tell thee,” said Luned.  “Unless thou canst defend the fountain, thou
canst not maintain thy dominions; and no one can defend the fountain,
except it be a knight of Arthur’s household; and I will go to Arthur’s
Court, and ill betide me, if I return thence without a warrior who can
guard the fountain as well as, or even better than, he who defended it
formerly.”  “That will be hard to perform,” said the Countess.  “Go,
however, and make proof of that which thou hast promised.”

Luned set out, under the pretence of going to Arthur’s Court; but she
went back to the chamber where she had left Owain; and she tarried there
with him as long as it might have taken her to have travelled to the
Court of King Arthur.  And at the end of that time, she apparelled
herself and went to visit the Countess.  And the Countess was much
rejoiced when she saw her, and inquired what news she brought from the
Court.  “I bring thee the best of news,” said Luned, “for I have
compassed the object of my mission.  When wilt thou, that I should
present to thee the chieftain who has come with me hither?”  “Bring him
here to visit me to-morrow, at mid-day,” said the Countess, “and I will
cause the town to be assembled by that time.”

And Luned returned home.  And the next day, at noon, Owain arrayed
himself in a coat, and a surcoat, and a mantle of yellow satin, upon
which was a broad band of gold lace; and on his feet were high shoes of
variegated leather, which were fastened by golden clasps, in the form of
lions.  And they proceeded to the chamber of the Countess.

Right glad was the Countess of their coming, and she gazed steadfastly
upon Owain, and said, “Luned, this knight has not the look of a
traveller.”  “What harm is there in that, lady?” said Luned.  “I am
certain,” said the Countess, “that no other man than this chased the soul
from the body of my lord.”  “So much the better for thee, lady,” said
Luned, “for had he not been stronger than thy lord he could not have
deprived him of life.  There is no remedy for that which is past, be it
as it may.”  “Go back to thine abode,” said the Countess, “and I will
take counsel.”

The next day the Countess caused all her subjects to assemble, and showed
them that her earldom was left defenceless, and that it could not be
protected but with horse and arms, and military skill.  “Therefore,” said
she, “this is what I offer for your choice: either let one of you take
me, or give your consent for me to take a husband from elsewhere to
defend my dominions.”

So they came to the determination that it was better that she should have
permission to marry some one from elsewhere; and, thereupon, she sent for
the bishops and archbishops to celebrate her nuptials with Owain.  And
the men of the earldom did Owain homage.

And Owain defended the Fountain with lance and sword.  And this is the
manner in which he defended it: Whensoever a knight came there he
overthrew him, and sold him for his full worth, and what he thus gained
he divided among his barons and his knights; and no man in the whole
world could be more beloved than he was by his subjects.  And it was thus
for the space of three years.

                                * * * * *

It befell that as Gwalchmai went forth one day with King Arthur, he
perceived him to be very sad and sorrowful.  And Gwalchmai was much
grieved to see Arthur in this state; and he questioned him, saying, “Oh,
my lord! what has befallen thee?”  “In sooth, Gwalchmai,” said Arthur, “I
am grieved concerning Owain, whom I have lost these three years, and I
shall certainly die if the fourth year passes without my seeing him.  Now
I am sure, that it is through the tale which Kynon the son of Clydno
related, that I have lost Owain.”  “There is no need for thee,” said
Gwalchmai, “to summon to arms thy whole dominions on this account, for
thou thyself and the men of thy household will be able to avenge Owain,
if he be slain; or to set him free, if he be in prison; and, if alive, to
bring him back with thee.”  And it was settled according to what
Gwalchmai had said.

Then Arthur and the men of his household prepared to go and seek Owain,
and their number was three thousand, besides their attendants.  And Kynon
the son of Clydno acted as their guide.  And Arthur came to the Castle
where Kynon had been before, and when he came there the youths were
shooting in the same place, and the yellow man was standing hard by.
When the yellow man saw Arthur he greeted him, and invited him to the
Castle; and Arthur accepted his invitation, and they entered the Castle
together.  And great as was the number of his retinue, their presence was
scarcely observed in the Castle, so vast was its extent.  And the maidens
rose up to wait on them, and the service of the maidens appeared to them
all to excel any attendance they had ever met with; and even the pages
who had charge of the horses were no worse served, that night, than
Arthur himself would have been in his own palace.

The next morning Arthur set out thence, with Kynon for his guide, and
came to the place where the black man was.  And the stature of the black
man was more surprising to Arthur than it had been represented to him.
And they came to the top of the wooded steep, and traversed the valley
till they reached the green tree, where they saw the fountain, and the
bowl, and the slab.  And upon that, Kai came to Arthur and spoke to him.
“My lord,” said he, “I know the meaning of all this, and my request is,
that thou wilt permit me to throw the water on the slab, and to receive
the first adventure that may befall.”  And Arthur gave him leave.

Then Kai threw a bowlful of water upon the slab, and immediately there
came the thunder, and after the thunder the shower.  And such a
thunderstorm they had never known before, and many of the attendants who
were in Arthur’s train were killed by the shower.  After the shower had
ceased the sky became clear; and on looking at the tree they beheld it
completely leafless.  Then the birds descended upon the tree, and the
song of the birds was far sweeter than any strain they had ever heard
before.  Then they beheld a knight on a coal-black horse, clothed in
black satin, coming rapidly towards them.  And Kai met him and
encountered him, and it was not long before Kai was overthrown.  And the
knight withdrew, and Arthur and his host encamped for the night.

And when they arose in the morning, they perceived the signal of combat
upon the lance of the Knight.  And Kai came to Arthur, and spoke to him:
“My lord,” said he, “though I was overthrown yesterday, if it seem good
to thee, I would gladly meet the Knight again to-day.”  “Thou mayst do
so,” said Arthur.  And Kai went towards the Knight.  And on the spot he
overthrew Kai, and struck him with the head of his lance in the forehead,
so that it broke his helmet and the head-piece, and pierced the skin and
the flesh, the breadth of the spear-head, even to the bone.  And Kai
returned to his companions.

After this, all the household of Arthur went forth, one after the other,
to combat the Knight, until there was not one that was not overthrown by
him, except Arthur and Gwalchmai.  And Arthur armed himself to encounter
the Knight.  “Oh, my lord,” said Gwalchmai, “permit me to fight with him
first.”  And Arthur permitted him.  And he went forth to meet the Knight,
having over himself and his horse a satin robe of honour which had been
sent him by the daughter of the Earl of Rhangyw, and in this dress he was
not known by any of the host.  And they charged each other, and fought
all that day until the evening, and neither of them was able to unhorse
the other.

The next day they fought with strong lances, and neither of them could
obtain the mastery.

And the third day they fought with exceeding strong lances.  And they
were incensed with rage, and fought furiously, even until noon.  And they
gave each other such a shock that the girths of their horses were broken,
so that they fell over their horses’ cruppers to the ground.  And they
rose up speedily, and drew their swords, and resumed the combat; and the
multitude that witnessed their encounter felt assured that they had never
before seen two men so valiant or so powerful.  And had it been midnight,
it would have been light from the fire that flashed from their weapons.
And the Knight gave Gwalchmai a blow that turned his helmet from off his
face, so that the Knight knew that it was Gwalchmai.  Then Owain said,
“My lord Gwalchmai, I did not know thee for my cousin, owing to the robe
of honour that enveloped thee; take my sword and my arms.”  Said
Gwalchmai, “Thou, Owain, art the victor; take thou my sword.”  And with
that Arthur saw that they were conversing, and advanced towards them.
“My lord Arthur,” said Gwalchmai, “here is Owain, who has vanquished me,
and will not take my arms.”  “My lord,” said Owain, “it is he that has
vanquished me, and he will not take my sword.”  “Give me your swords,”
said Arthur, “and then neither of you has vanquished the other.”  Then
Owain put his arms around Arthur’s neck, and they embraced.  And all the
host hurried forward to see Owain, and to embrace him; and there was nigh
being a loss of life, so great was the press.

And they retired that night, and the next day Arthur prepared to depart.
“My lord,” said Owain, “this is not well of thee; for I have been absent
from thee these three years, and during all that time, up to this very
day, I have been preparing a banquet for thee, knowing that thou wouldst
come to seek me.  Tarry with me, therefore, until thou and thy attendants
have recovered the fatigues of the journey, and have been anointed.”

And they all proceeded to the Castle of the Countess of the Fountain, and
the banquet which had been three years preparing was consumed in three
months.  Never had they a more delicious or agreeable banquet.  And
Arthur prepared to depart.  Then he sent an embassy to the Countess, to
beseech her to permit Owain to go with him for the space of three months,
that he might show him to the nobles and the fair dames of the Island of
Britain.  And the Countess gave her consent, although it was very painful
to her.  So Owain came with Arthur to the Island of Britain.  And when he
was once more amongst his kindred and friends, he remained three years,
instead of three months, with them.

                                * * * * *

And as Owain one day sat at meat, in the city of Caerlleon upon Usk,
behold a damsel entered upon a bay horse, with a curling mane and covered
with foam, and the bridle and so much as was seen of the saddle were of
gold.  And the damsel was arrayed in a dress of yellow satin.  And she
came up to Owain, and took the ring from off his hand.  “Thus,” said she,
“shall be treated the deceiver, the traitor, the faithless, the
disgraced, and the beardless.”  And she turned her horse’s head and
departed.

Then his adventure came to Owain’s remembrance, and he was sorrowful; and
having finished eating he went to his own abode and made preparations
that night.  And the next day he arose but did not go to the Court, but
wandered to the distant parts of the earth and to uncultivated mountains.
And he remained there until all his apparel was worn out, and his body
was wasted away, and his hair was grown long.  And he went about with the
wild beasts and fed with them, until they became familiar with him; but
at length he grew so weak that he could no longer bear them company.
Then he descended from the mountains to the valley, and came to a park
that was the fairest in the world, and belonged to a widowed Countess.

One day the Countess and her maidens went forth to walk by a lake, that
was in the middle of the park.  And they saw the form of a man.  And they
were terrified.  Nevertheless they went near him, and touched him, and
looked at him.  And they saw that there was life in him, though he was
exhausted by the heat of the sun.  And the Countess returned to the
Castle, and took a flask full of precious ointment, and gave it to one of
her maidens.  “Go with this,” said she, “and take with thee yonder horse
and clothing, and place them near the man we saw just now.  And anoint
him with this balsam, near his heart; and if there is life in him, he
will arise through the efficacy of this balsam.  Then watch what he will
do.”

And the maiden departed from her, and poured the whole of the balsam upon
Owain, and left the horse and the garments hard by, and went a little way
off, and hid herself to watch him.  In a short time she saw him begin to
move his arms; and he rose up, and looked at his person, and became
ashamed of the unseemliness of his appearance.  Then he perceived the
horse and the garments that were near him.  And he crept forward till he
was able to draw the garments to him from off the saddle.  And he clothed
himself, and with difficulty mounted the horse.  Then the damsel
discovered herself to him, and saluted him.  And he was rejoiced when he
saw her, and inquired of her, what land and what territory that was.
“Truly,” said the maiden, “a widowed Countess owns yonder Castle; at the
death of her husband, he left her two Earldoms, but at this day she has
but this one dwelling that has not been wrested from her by a young Earl,
who is her neighbour, because she refused to become his wife.”  “That is
pity,” said Owain.  And he and the maiden proceeded to the Castle; and he
alighted there, and the maiden conducted him to a pleasant chamber, and
kindled a fire and left him.

And the maiden came to the Countess, and gave the flask into her hand.
“Ha! maiden,” said the Countess, “where is all the balsam?”  “Have I not
used it all?” said she.  “Oh, maiden,” said the Countess, “I cannot
easily forgive thee this; it is sad for me to have wasted seven-score
pounds’ worth of precious ointment upon a stranger whom I know not.
However, maiden, wait thou upon him, until he is quite recovered.”

And the maiden did so, and furnished him with meat and drink, and fire,
and lodging, and medicaments, until he was well again.  And in three
months he was restored to his former guise, and became even more comely
than he had ever been before.

One day Owain heard a great tumult, and a sound of arms in the Castle,
and he inquired of the maiden the cause thereof.  “The Earl,” said she,
“whom I mentioned to thee, has come before the Castle, with a numerous
army, to subdue the Countess.”  And Owain inquired of her whether the
Countess had a horse and arms in her possession.  “She has the best in
the world,” said the maiden.  “Wilt thou go and request the loan of a
horse and arms for me,” said Owain, “that I may go and look at this
army?”  “I will,” said the maiden.

And she came to the Countess, and told her what Owain had said.  And the
Countess laughed.  “Truly,” said she, “I will even give him a horse and
arms for ever; such a horse and such arms had he never yet, and I am glad
that they should be taken by him to-day, lest my enemies should have them
against my will to-morrow.  Yet I know not what he would do with them.”

The Countess bade them bring out a beautiful black steed, upon which was
a beechen saddle, and a suit of armour, for man and horse.  And Owain
armed himself, and mounted the horse, and went forth, attended by two
pages completely equipped, with horses and arms.  And when they came near
to the Earl’s army, they could see neither its extent nor its extremity.
And Owain asked the pages in which troop the Earl was.  “In yonder
troop,” said they, “in which are four yellow standards.  Two of them are
before, and two behind him.”  “Now,” said Owain, “do you return and await
me near the portal of the Castle.”  So they returned, and Owain pressed
forward until he met the Earl.  And Owain drew him completely out of his
saddle, and turned his horse’s head towards the Castle, and though it was
with difficulty, he brought the Earl to the portal, where the pages
awaited him.  And in they came.  And Owain presented the Earl as a gift
to the Countess.  And said to her, “Behold a requital to thee for thy
blessed balsam.”

The army encamped around the Castle.  And the Earl restored to the
Countess the two Earldoms he had taken from her, as a ransom for his
life; and for his freedom he gave her the half of his own dominions, and
all his gold, and his silver, and his jewels, besides hostages.

And Owain took his departure.  And the Countess and all her subjects
besought him to remain, but Owain chose rather to wander through distant
lands and deserts.

And as he journeyed, he heard a loud yelling in a wood.  And it was
repeated a second and a third time.  And Owain went towards the spot, and
beheld a huge craggy mound, in the middle of the wood; on the side of
which was a grey rock.  And there was a cleft in the rock, and a serpent
was within the cleft.  And near the rock stood a black lion, and every
time the lion sought to go thence, the serpent darted towards him to
attack him.  And Owain unsheathed his sword, and drew near to the rock;
and as the serpent sprang out, he struck him with his sword, and cut him
in two.  And he dried his sword, and went on his way, as before.  But
behold the lion followed him, and played about him, as though it had been
a greyhound that he had reared.

They proceeded thus throughout the day, until the evening.  And when it
was time for Owain to take his rest, he dismounted, and turned his horse
loose in a flat and wooded meadow.  And he struck fire, and when the fire
was kindled, the lion brought him fuel enough to last for three nights.
And the lion disappeared.  And presently the lion returned, bearing a
fine large roebuck.  And he threw it down before Owain, who went towards
the fire with it.

And Owain took the roebuck, and skinned it, and placed collops of its
flesh upon skewers, around the fire.  The rest of the buck he gave to the
lion to devour.  While he was doing this, he heard a deep sigh near him,
and a second, and a third.  And Owain called out to know whether the sigh
he heard proceeded from a mortal; and he received answer that it did.
“Who art thou?” said Owain.  “Truly,” said the voice, “I am Luned, the
handmaiden of the Countess of the Fountain.”  “And what dost thou here?”
said Owain.  “I am imprisoned,” said she, “on account of the knight who
came from Arthur’s Court, and married the Countess.  And he stayed a
short time with her, but he afterwards departed for the Court of Arthur,
and has not returned since.  And he was the friend I loved best in the
world.  And two of the pages in the Countess’s chamber traduced him, and
called him a deceiver.  And I told them that they two were not a match
for him alone.  So they imprisoned me in the stone vault, and said that I
should be put to death, unless he came himself to deliver me, by a
certain day; and that is no further off than the day after to-morrow.
And I have no one to send to seek him for me.  And his name is Owain the
son of Urien.”  “And art thou certain that if that knight knew all this,
he would come to thy rescue?”  “I am most certain of it,” said she.

When the collops were cooked, Owain divided them into two parts, between
himself and the maiden; and after they had eaten, they talked together,
until the day dawned.  And the next morning Owain inquired of the damsel,
if there was any place where he could get food and entertainment for that
night.  “There is, Lord,” said she; “cross over yonder, and go along the
side of the river, and in a short time thou wilt see a great Castle, in
which are many towers, and the Earl who owns that Castle is the most
hospitable man in the world.  There thou mayst spend the night.”

Never did sentinel keep stricter watch over his lord, than the lion that
night over Owain.

And Owain accoutred his horse, and passed across by the ford, and came in
sight of the Castle.  And he entered it, and was honourably received.
And his horse was well cared for, and plenty of fodder was placed before
him.  Then the lion went and lay down in the horse’s manger; so that none
of the people of the Castle dared to approach him.  The treatment which
Owain met with there was such as he had never known elsewhere, for every
one was as sorrowful as though death had been upon him.  And they went to
meat; and the Earl sat upon one side of Owain, and on the other side his
only daughter.  And Owain had never seen any more lovely than she.  Then
the lion came and placed himself between Owain’s feet, and he fed him
with every kind of food that he took himself.  And he never saw anything
equal to the sadness of the people.

In the middle of the repast the Earl began to bid Owain welcome.  “Then,”
said Owain, “behold, it is time for thee to be cheerful.”  “Heaven
knows,” said the Earl, “that it is not thy coming that makes us
sorrowful, but we have cause enough for sadness and care.”  “What is
that?” said Owain.  “I have two sons,” replied the Earl, “and yesterday
they went to the mountains to hunt.  Now there is on the mountain a
monster who kills men and devours them, and he seized my sons; and
to-morrow is the time he has fixed to be here, and he threatens that he
will then slay my sons before my eyes, unless I will deliver into his
hands this my daughter.  He has the form of a man, but in stature he is
no less than a giant.”

“Truly,” said Owain, “that is lamentable.  And which wilt thou do?”
“Heaven knows,” said the Earl, “it will be better that my sons should be
slain against my will, than that I should voluntarily give up my daughter
to him to ill-treat and destroy.”  Then they talked about other things,
and Owain stayed there that night.

The next morning they heard an exceeding great clamour, which was caused
by the coming of the giant with the two youths.  And the Earl was anxious
both to protect his Castle and to release his two sons.  Then Owain put
on his armour and went forth to encounter the giant, and the lion
followed him.  And when the giant saw that Owain was armed, he rushed
towards him and attacked him.  And the lion fought with the giant much
more fiercely than Owain did.  “Truly,” said the giant, “I should find no
difficulty in fighting with thee, were it not for the animal that is with
thee.”  Upon that Owain took the lion back to the Castle and shut the
gate upon him, and then he returned to fight the giant, as before.  And
the lion roared very loud, for he heard that it went hard with Owain.
And he climbed up till he reached the top of the Earl’s hall, and thence
he got to the top of the Castle, and he sprang down from the walls and
went and joined Owain.  And the lion gave the giant a stroke with his
paw, which tore him from his shoulder to his hip, and his heart was laid
bare, and the giant fell down dead.  Then Owain restored the two youths
to their father.

The Earl besought Owain to remain with him, and he would not, but set
forward towards the meadow where Luned was.  And when he came there he
saw a great fire kindled, and two youths with beautiful curling auburn
hair were leading the maiden to cast her into the fire.  And Owain asked
them what charge they had against her.  And they told him of the compact
that was between them, as the maiden had done the night before.  “And,”
said they, “Owain has failed her, therefore we are taking her to be
burnt.”  “Truly,” said Owain, “he is a good knight, and if he knew that
the maiden was in such peril, I marvel that he came not to her rescue;
but if you will accept me in his stead, I will do battle with you.”  “We
will,” said the youths, “by him who made us.”

And they attacked Owain, and he was hard beset by them.  And with that
the lion came to Owain’s assistance, and they two got the better of the
young men.  And they said to him, “Chieftain, it was not agreed that we
should fight save with thyself alone, and it is harder for us to contend
with yonder animal than with thee.”  And Owain put the lion in the place
where the maiden had been imprisoned, and blocked up the door with
stones, and he went to fight with the young men, as before.  But Owain
had not his usual strength, and the two youths pressed hard upon him.
And the lion roared incessantly at seeing Owain in trouble; and he burst
through the wall until he found a way out, and rushed upon the young men,
and instantly slew them.  So Luned was saved from being burned.

Then Owain returned with Luned to the dominions of the Countess of the
Fountain.  And when he went thence he took the Countess with him to
Arthur’s Court, and she was his wife as long as she lived.

                                * * * * *

And then he took the road that led to the Court of the savage black man,
and Owain fought with him, and the lion did not quit Owain until he had
vanquished him.  And when he reached the Court of the savage black man he
entered the hall, and beheld four-and-twenty ladies, the fairest that
could be seen.  And the garments which they had on were not worth
four-and twenty pence, and they were as sorrowful as death.  And Owain
asked them the cause of their sadness.  And they said, “We are the
daughters of Earls, and we all came here with our husbands, whom we
dearly loved.  And we were received with honour and rejoicing.  And we
were thrown into a state of stupor, and while we were thus, the demon who
owns this Castle slew all our husbands, and took from us our horses, and
our raiment, and our gold, and our silver; and the corpses of our
husbands are still in this house, and many others with them.  And this,
Chieftain, is the cause of our grief, and we are sorry that thou art come
hither, lest harm should befall thee.”

And Owain was grieved when he heard this.  And he went forth from the
Castle, and he beheld a knight approaching him, who saluted him in a
friendly and cheerful manner, as if he had been a brother.  And this was
the savage black man.  “In very sooth,” said Owain, “it is not to seek
thy friendship that I am here.”  “In sooth,” said he, “thou shalt not
find it then.”  And with that they charged each other, and fought
furiously.  And Owain overcame him, and bound his hands behind his back.
Then the black savage besought Owain to spare his life, and spoke thus:
“My lord Owain,” said he, “it was foretold that thou shouldst come hither
and vanquish me, and thou hast done so.  I was a robber here, and my
house was a house of spoil; but grant me my life, and I will become the
keeper of an Hospice, and I will maintain this house as an Hospice for
weak and for strong, as long as I live, for the good of thy soul.”  And
Owain accepted this proposal of him, and remained there that night.

And the next day he took the four-and-twenty ladies, and their horses,
and their raiment, and what they possessed of goods and jewels, and
proceeded with them to Arthur’s Court.  And if Arthur was rejoiced when
he saw him, after he had lost him the first time, his joy was now much
greater.  And of those ladies, such as wished to remain in Arthur’s Court
remained there, and such as wished to depart departed.

And thenceforward Owain dwelt at Arthur’s Court greatly beloved, as the
head of his household, until he went away with his followers; and those
were the army of three hundred ravens which Kenverchyn had left him.  And
wherever Owain went with these he was victorious.

And this is the tale of THE LADY OF THE FOUNTAIN.




PEREDUR THE SON OF EVRAWC


EARL EVRAWC owned the Earldom of the North.  And he had seven sons.  And
Evrawc maintained himself not so much by his own possessions as by
attending tournaments, and wars, and combats.  And, as it often befalls
those who join in encounters and wars, he was slain, and six of his sons
likewise.  Now the name of his seventh son was Peredur, and he was the
youngest of them.  And he was not of an age to go to wars and encounters,
otherwise he might have been slain as well as his father and brothers.
His mother was a scheming and thoughtful woman, and she was very
solicitous concerning this her only son and his possessions.  So she took
counsel with herself to leave the inhabited country, and to flee to the
deserts and unfrequented wildernesses.  And she permitted none to bear
her company thither but women and boys, and spiritless men, who were both
unaccustomed and unequal to war and fighting.  And none dared to bring
either horses or arms where her son was, lest he should set his mind upon
them.  And the youth went daily to divert himself in the forest, by
flinging sticks and staves.  And one day he saw his mother’s flock of
goats, and near the goats two hinds were standing.  And he marvelled
greatly that these two should be without horns, while the others had
them.  And he thought they had long run wild, and on that account they
had lost their horns.  And by activity and swiftness of foot, he drove
the hinds and the goats together into the house which there was for the
goats at the extremity of the forest.  Then Peredur returned to his
mother.  “Ah, mother,” said he, “a marvellous thing have I seen in the
wood; two of thy goats have run wild, and lost their horns, through their
having been so long missing in the wood.  And no man had ever more
trouble than I had to drive them in.”  Then they all arose and went to
see.  And when they beheld the hinds they were greatly astonished.

And one day they saw three knights coming along the horse-road on the
borders of the forest.  And the three knights were Gwalchmai the son of
Gwyar, and Geneir Gwystyl, and Owain the son of Urien.  And Owain kept on
the track of the knight who had divided the apples in Arthur’s Court,
whom they were in pursuit of.  “Mother,” said Peredur, “what are those
yonder?”  “They are angels, my son,” said she.  “By my faith,” said
Peredur, “I will go and become an angel with them.”  And Peredur went to
the road, and met them.  “Tell me, good soul,” said Owain, “sawest thou a
knight pass this way, either to-day or yesterday?”  “I know not,”
answered he, “what a knight is.”  “Such an one as I am,” said Owain.  “If
thou wilt tell me what I ask thee, I will tell thee that which thou
askest me.”  “Gladly will I do so,” replied Owain.  “What is this?”
demanded Peredur, concerning the saddle.  “It is a saddle,” said Owain.
Then he asked about all the accoutrements which he saw upon the men, and
the horses, and the arms, and what they were for, and how they were used.
And Owain shewed him all these things fully, and told him what use was
made of them.  “Go forward,” said Peredur, “for I saw such an one as thou
inquirest for, and I will follow thee.”

Then Peredur returned to his mother and her company, and he said to her,
“Mother, those were not angels, but honourable knights.”  Then his mother
swooned away.  And Peredur went to the place where they kept the horses
that carried firewood, and that brought meat and drink from the inhabited
country to the desert.  And he took a bony piebald horse, which seemed to
him the strongest of them.  And he pressed a pack into the form of a
saddle, and with twisted twigs he imitated the trappings which he had
seen upon the horses.  And when Peredur came again to his mother, the
Countess had recovered from her swoon.  “My son,” said she, “desirest
thou to ride forth?”  “Yes, with thy leave,” said he.  “Wait, then, that
I may counsel thee before thou goest.”  “Willingly,” he answered; “speak
quickly.”  “Go forward, then,” she said, “to the Court of Arthur, where
there are the best, and the boldest, and the most bountiful of men.  And
wherever thou seest a church, repeat there thy Paternoster unto it.  And
if thou see meat and drink, and have need of them, and none have the
kindness or the courtesy to give them to thee, take them thyself.  If
thou hear an outcry, proceed towards it, especially if it be the outcry
of a woman.  If thou see a fair jewel, possess thyself of it, and give it
to another, for thus thou shalt obtain praise.  If thou see a fair woman,
pay thy court to her, whether she will or no; for thus thou wilt render
thyself a better and more esteemed man than thou wast before.”

After this discourse, Peredur mounted the horse, and taking a handful of
sharp-pointed forks in his hand, he rode forth.  And he journeyed two
days and two nights in the woody wildernesses, and in desert places,
without food and without drink.  And then he came to a vast wild wood,
and far within the wood he saw a fair even glade, and in the glade he saw
a tent, and the tent seeming to him to be a church, he repeated his
Paternoster to it.  And he went towards it, and the door of the tent was
open.  And a golden chair was near the door.  And on the chair sat a
lovely auburn-haired maiden, with a golden frontlet on her forehead, and
sparkling stones in the frontlet, and with a large gold ring on her hand.
And Peredur dismounted, and entered the tent.  And the maiden was glad at
his coming, and bade him welcome.  At the entrance of the tent he saw
food, and two flasks full of wine, and two loaves of fine wheaten flour,
and collops of the flesh of the wild boar.  “My mother told me,” said
Peredur, “wheresoever I saw meat and drink, to take it.”  “Take the meat
and welcome, chieftain,” said she.  So Peredur took half of the meat and
of the liquor himself, and left the rest to the maiden.  And when Peredur
had finished eating, he bent upon his knee before the maiden.  “My
mother,” said he, “told me, wheresoever I saw a fair jewel, to take it.”
“Do so, my soul,” said she.  So Peredur took the ring.  And he mounted
his horse, and proceeded on his journey.

After this, behold the knight came to whom the tent belonged; and he was
the Lord of the Glade.  And he saw the track of the horse, and he said to
the maiden, “Tell me who has been here since I departed.”  “A man,” said
she, “of wonderful demeanour.”  And she described to him what Peredur’s
appearance and conduct had been.  “Tell me,” said he, “did he offer thee
any wrong?”  “No,” answered the maiden, “by my faith, he harmed me not.”
“By my faith, I do not believe thee; and until I can meet with him, and
revenge the insult he has done me, and wreak my vengeance upon him, thou
shalt not remain two nights in the same house.”  And the knight arose,
and set forth to seek Peredur.

Meanwhile Peredur journeyed on towards Arthur’s Court.  And before he
reached it, another knight had been there, who gave a ring of thick gold
at the door of the gate for holding his horse, and went into the Hall
where Arthur and his household, and Gwenhwyvar and her maidens, were
assembled.  And the page of the chamber was serving Gwenhwyvar with a
golden goblet.  Then the knight dashed the liquor that was therein upon
her face, and upon her stomacher, and gave her a violent blow on the
face, and said, “If any have the boldness to dispute this goblet with me,
and to revenge the insult to Gwenhwyvar, let him follow me to the meadow,
and there I will await him.”  So the knight took his horse, and rode to
the meadow.  And all the household hung down their heads, lest any of
them should be requested to go and avenge the insult to Gwenhwyvar.  For
it seemed to them, that no one would have ventured on so daring an
outrage, unless he possessed such powers, through magic or charms, that
none could be able to take vengeance upon him.  Then, behold, Peredur
entered the Hall, upon the bony piebald horse, with the uncouth trappings
upon it; and in this way he traversed the whole length of the Hall.  In
the centre of the Hall stood Kai.  “Tell me, tall man,” said Peredur, “is
that Arthur yonder?”  “What wouldest thou with Arthur?” asked Kai.  “My
mother told me to go to Arthur, and receive the honour of knighthood.”
“By my faith,” said he, “thou art all too meanly equipped with horse and
with arms.”  Thereupon he was perceived by all the household, and they
threw sticks at him.  Then, behold, a dwarf came forward.  He had already
been a year at Arthur’s Court, both he and a female dwarf.  They had
craved harbourage of Arthur, and had obtained it; and during the whole
year, neither of them had spoken a single word to any one.  When the
dwarf beheld Peredur, “Haha!” said he, “the welcome of Heaven be unto
thee, goodly Peredur, son of Evrawc, the chief of warriors, and flower of
knighthood.”  “Truly,” said Kai, “thou art ill-taught to remain a year
mute at Arthur’s Court, with choice of society; and now, before the face
of Arthur and all his household, to call out, and declare such a man as
this the chief of warriors, and the flower of knighthood.”  And he gave
him such a box on the ear that he fell senseless to the ground.  Then
exclaimed the female dwarf, “Haha! goodly Peredur, son of Evrawc; the
welcome of Heaven be unto thee, flower of knights, and light of
chivalry.”  “Of a truth, maiden,” said Kai, “thou art ill-bred to remain
mute for a year at the Court of Arthur, and then to speak as thou dost of
such a man as this.”  And Kai kicked her with his foot, so that she fell
to the ground senseless.  “Tall man,” said Peredur, “shew me which is
Arthur.”  “Hold thy peace,” said Kai, “and go after the knight who went
hence to the meadow, and take from him the goblet, and overthrow him, and
possess thyself of his horse and arms, and then thou shalt receive the
order of knighthood.”  “I will do so, tall man,” said Peredur.  So he
turned his horse’s head towards the meadow.  And when he came there, the
knight was riding up and down, proud of his strength, and valour, and
noble mien.  “Tell me,” said the knight, “didst thou see any one coming
after me from the Court?”  “The tall man that was there,” said he,
“desired me to come, and overthrow thee, and to take from thee the
goblet, and thy horse and thy armour for myself.”  “Silence!” said the
knight; “go back to the Court, and tell Arthur, from me, either to come
himself, or to send some other to fight with me; and unless he do so
quickly, I will not wait for him.”  “By my faith,” said Peredur, “choose
thou whether it shall be willingly or unwillingly, but I will have the
horse, and the arms, and the goblet.”  And upon this the knight ran at
him furiously, and struck him a violent blow with the shaft of his spear,
between the neck and the shoulder.  “Haha! lad,” said Peredur, “my
mother’s servants were not used to play with me in this wise; therefore,
thus will I play with thee.”  And thereupon he struck him with a
sharp-pointed fork, and it hit him in the eye, and came out at the back
of his neck, so that he instantly fell down lifeless.

“Verily,” said Owain the son of Urien to Kai, “thou wert ill-advised,
when thou didst send that madman after the knight.  For one of two things
must befall him.  He must either be overthrown, or slain.  If he is
overthrown by the knight, he will be counted by him to be an honourable
person of the Court, and an eternal disgrace will it be to Arthur and his
warriors.  And if he is slain, the disgrace will be the same, and
moreover, his sin will be upon him; therefore will I go to see what has
befallen him.”  So Owain went to the meadow, and he found Peredur
dragging the man about.  “What art thou doing thus?” said Owain.  “This
iron coat,” said Peredur, “will never come from off him; not by my
efforts, at any rate.”  And Owain unfastened his armour and his clothes.
“Here, my good soul,” said he, “is a horse and armour better than thine.
Take them joyfully, and come with me to Arthur, to receive the order of
knighthood, for thou dost merit it.”  “May I never shew my face again if
I go,” said Peredur; “but take thou the goblet to Gwenhwyvar, and tell
Arthur, that wherever I am, I will be his vassal, and will do him what
profit and service I am able.  And say that I will not come to his Court
until I have encountered the tall man that is there, to revenge the
injury he did to the dwarf and dwarfess.”  And Owain went back to the
Court, and related all these things to Arthur and Gwenhwyvar, and to all
the household.

And Peredur rode forward.  And as he proceeded, behold a knight met him.
“Whence comest thou?” said the knight.  “I come from Arthur’s Court,”
said Peredur.  “Art thou one of his men?” asked he.  “Yes, by my faith,”
he answered.  “A good service, truly, is that of Arthur.”  “Wherefore
sayest thou so?” said Peredur.  “I will tell thee,” said he; “I have
always been Arthur’s enemy, and all such of his men as I have ever
encountered I have slain.”  And without further parlance they fought, and
it was not long before Peredur brought him to the ground, over his
horse’s crupper.  Then the knight besought his mercy.  “Mercy thou shalt
have,” said Peredur, “if thou wilt make oath to me, that thou wilt go to
Arthur’s Court, and tell him that it was I that overthrew thee, for the
honour of his service; and say, that I will never come to the Court until
I have avenged the insult offered to the dwarf and dwarfess.”  The knight
pledged him his faith of this, and proceeded to the Court of Arthur, and
said as he had promised, and conveyed the threat to Kai.

And Peredur rode forward.  And within that week he encountered sixteen
knights, and overthrew them all shamefully.  And they all went to
Arthur’s Court, taking with them the same message which the first knight
had conveyed from Peredur, and the same threat which he had sent to Kai.
And thereupon Kai was reproved by Arthur; and Kai was greatly grieved
thereat.

And Peredur rode forward.  And he came to a vast and desert wood, on the
confines of which was a lake.  And on the other side was a fair castle.
And on the border of the lake he saw a venerable, hoary-headed man,
sitting upon a velvet cushion, and having a garment of velvet upon him.
And his attendants were fishing in the lake.  When the hoary-headed man
beheld Peredur approaching, he arose and went towards the castle.  And
the old man was lame.  Peredur rode to the palace, and the door was open,
and he entered the hall.  And there was the hoary-headed man sitting on a
cushion, and a large blazing fire burning before him.  And the household
and the company arose to meet Peredur, and disarrayed him.  And the man
asked the youth to sit on the cushion; and they sat down, and conversed
together.  When it was time, the tables were laid, and they went to meat.
And when they had finished their meal, the man inquired of Peredur if he
knew well how to fight with the sword.  “I know not,” said Peredur, “but
were I to be taught, doubtless I should.”  “Whoever can play well with
the cudgel and shield, will also be able to fight with a sword.”  And the
man had two sons; the one had yellow hair, and the other auburn.  “Arise,
youths,” said he, “and play with the cudgel and the shield.”  And so did
they.  “Tell me, my soul,” said the man, “which of the youths thinkest
thou plays best.”  “I think,” said Peredur, “that the yellow-haired youth
could draw blood from the other, if he chose.”  “Arise thou, my life, and
take the cudgel and the shield from the hand of the youth with the auburn
hair, and draw blood from the yellow-haired youth if thou canst.”  So
Peredur arose, and went to play with the yellow-haired youth; and he
lifted up his arm, and struck him such a mighty blow, that his brow fell
over his eye, and the blood flowed forth.  “Ah, my life,” said the man,
“come now, and sit down, for thou wilt become the best fighter with the
sword of any in this island; and I am thy uncle, thy mother’s brother.
And with me shalt thou remain a space, in order to learn the manners and
customs of different countries, and courtesy, and gentleness, and noble
bearing.  Leave, then, the habits and the discourse of thy mother, and I
will be thy teacher; and I will raise thee to the rank of knight from
this time forward.  And thus do thou.  If thou seest aught to cause thee
wonder, ask not the meaning of it; if no one has the courtesy to inform
thee, the reproach will not fall upon thee, but upon me that am thy
teacher.”  And they had abundance of honour and service.  And when it was
time they went to sleep.  At the break of day, Peredur arose, and took
his horse, and with his uncle’s permission he rode forth.  And he came to
a vast desert wood, and at the further end of the wood was a meadow, and
on the other side of the meadow he saw a large castle.  And thitherward
Peredur bent his way, and he found the gate open, and he proceeded to the
hall.  And he beheld a stately hoary-headed man sitting on one side of
the hall, and many pages around him, who arose to receive and to honour
Peredur.  And they placed him by the side of the owner of the palace.
Then they discoursed together; and when it was time to eat, they caused
Peredur to sit beside the nobleman during the repast.  And when they had
eaten and drunk as much as they desired, the nobleman asked Peredur
whether he could fight with a sword?  “Were I to receive instruction,”
said Peredur, “I think I could.”  Now, there was on the floor of the hall
a huge staple, as large as a warrior could grasp.  “Take yonder sword,”
said the man to Peredur, “and strike the iron staple.”  So Peredur arose
and struck the staple, so that he cut it in two; and the sword broke into
two parts also.  “Place the two parts together, and reunite them,” and
Peredur placed them together, and they became entire as they were before.
And a second time he struck upon the staple, so that both it and the
sword broke in two, and as before they reunited.  And the third time he
gave a like blow, and placed the broken parts together, and neither the
staple nor the sword would unite as before.  “Youth,” said the nobleman,
“come now, and sit down, and my blessing be upon thee.  Thou fightest
best with the sword of any man in the kingdom.  Thou hast arrived at
two-thirds of thy strength, and the other third thou hast not yet
obtained; and when thou attainest to thy full power, none will be able to
contend with thee.  I am thy uncle, thy mother’s brother, and I am
brother to the man in whose house thou wast last night.”  Then Peredur
and his uncle discoursed together, and he beheld two youths enter the
hall, and proceed up to the chamber, bearing a spear of mighty size, with
three streams of blood flowing from the point to the ground.  And when
all the company saw this, they began wailing and lamenting.  But for all
that, the man did not break off his discourse with Peredur.  And as he
did not tell Peredur the meaning of what he saw, he forbore to ask him
concerning it.  And when the clamour had a little subsided, behold two
maidens entered, with a large salver between them, in which was a man’s
head, surrounded by a profusion of blood.  And thereupon the company of
the court made so great an outcry, that it was irksome to be in the same
hall with them.  But at length they were silent.  And when time was that
they should sleep, Peredur was brought into a fair chamber.

And the next day, with his uncle’s permission, he rode forth.  And he
came to a wood, and far within the wood he heard a loud cry, and he saw a
beautiful woman with auburn hair, and a horse with a saddle upon it,
standing near her, and a corpse by her side.  And as she strove to place
the corpse upon the horse, it fell to the ground, and thereupon she made
a great lamentation.  “Tell me, sister,” said Peredur, “wherefore art
thou bewailing?”  “Oh! accursed Peredur, little pity has my ill-fortune
ever met with from thee.”  “Wherefore,” said Peredur, “am I accursed?”
“Because thou wast the cause of thy mother’s death; for when thou didst
ride forth against her will, anguish seized upon her heart, so that she
died; and therefore art thou accursed.  And the dwarf and the dwarfess
that thou sawest at Arthur’s Court were the dwarfs of thy father and
mother; and I am thy foster-sister, and this was my wedded husband, and
he was slain by the knight that is in the glade in the wood; and do not
thou go near him, lest thou shouldest be slain by him likewise.”  “My
sister, thou dost reproach me wrongfully; through my having so long
remained amongst you, I shall scarcely vanquish him; and had I continued
longer, it would, indeed, be difficult for me to succeed.  Cease,
therefore, thy lamenting, for it is of no avail, and I will bury the
body, and then I will go in quest of the knight, and see if I can do
vengeance upon him.”  And when he had buried the body, they went to the
place where the knight was, and found him riding proudly along the glade;
and he inquired of Peredur whence he came.  “I come from Arthur’s Court.”
“And art thou one of Arthur’s men?”  “Yes, by my faith.”  “A profitable
alliance, truly, is that of Arthur.”  And without further parlance, they
encountered one another, and immediately Peredur overthrew the knight,
and he besought mercy of Peredur.  “Mercy shalt thou have,” said he,
“upon these terms, that thou take this woman in marriage, and do her all
the honour and reverence in thy power, seeing thou hast, without cause,
slain her wedded husband; and that thou go to Arthur’s Court, and shew
him that it was I that overthrew thee, to do him honour and service; and
that thou tell him that I will never come to his Court again until I have
met with the tall man that is there, to take vengeance upon him for his
insult to the dwarf and dwarfess.”  And he took the knight’s assurance,
that he would perform all this.  Then the knight provided the lady with a
horse and garments that were suitable for her, and took her with him to
Arthur’s Court.  And he told Arthur all that had occurred, and gave the
defiance to Kai.  And Arthur and all his household reproved Kai, for
having driven such a youth as Peredur from his Court.

Said Owain the son of Urien, “This youth will never come into the Court
until Kai has gone forth from it.”  “By my faith,” said Arthur, “I will
search all the deserts in the Island of Britain, until I find Peredur,
and then let him and his adversary do their utmost to each other.”

Then Peredur rode forward.  And he came to a desert wood, where he saw
not the track either of men or animals, and where there was nothing but
bushes and weeds.  And at the upper end of the wood he saw a vast castle,
wherein were many strong towers; and when he came near the gate, he found
the weeds taller than he had seen them elsewhere.  And he struck the gate
with the shaft of his lance, and thereupon behold a lean, auburn-haired
youth came to an opening in the battlements.  “Choose thou, chieftain,”
said he, “whether shall I open the gate unto thee, or shall I announce
unto those that are chief, that thou art at the gateway?”  “Say that I am
here,” said Peredur, “and if it is desired that I should enter, I will go
in.”  And the youth came back, and opened the gate for Peredur.  And when
he went into the hall, he beheld eighteen youths, lean and red-headed, of
the same height, and of the same aspect, and of the same dress, and of
the same age as the one who had opened the gate for him.  And they were
well skilled in courtesy and in service.  And they disarrayed him.  Then
they sat down to discourse.  Thereupon, behold five maidens came from the
chamber into the hall.  And Peredur was certain that he had never seen
another of so fair an aspect as the chief of the maidens.  And she had an
old garment of satin upon her, which had once been handsome, but was then
so tattered, that her skin could be seen through it.  And whiter was her
skin than the bloom of crystal, and her hair and her two eyebrows were
blacker than jet, and on her cheeks were two red spots, redder than
whatever is reddest.  And the maiden welcomed Peredur, and put her arms
about his neck, and made him sit down beside her.  Not long after this he
saw two nuns enter, and a flask full of wine was borne by one, and six
loaves of white bread by the other.  “Lady,” said they, “Heaven is
witness, that there is not so much of food and liquor as this left in
yonder Convent this night.”  Then they went to meat, and Peredur observed
that the maiden wished to give more of the food and of the liquor to him
than to any of the others.  “My sister,” said Peredur, “I will share out
the food and the liquor.”  “Not so, my soul,” said she.  “By my faith but
I will.”  So Peredur took the bread, and he gave an equal portion of it
to each alike, as well as a cup full of the liquor.  And when it was time
for them to sleep, a chamber was prepared for Peredur, and he went to
rest.

“Behold, sister,” said the youths to the fairest and most exalted of the
maidens, “we have counsel for thee.”  “What may it be?” she inquired.
“Go to the youth that is in the upper chamber, and offer to become his
wife, or the lady of his love, if it seem well to him.”  “That were
indeed unfitting,” said she.  “Hitherto I have not been the lady-love of
any knight, and to make him such an offer before I am wooed by him, that,
truly, can I not do.”  “By our confession to Heaven, unless thou actest
thus, we will leave thee here to thy enemies, to do as they will with
thee.”  And through fear of this, the maiden went forth; and shedding
tears, she proceeded to the chamber.  And with the noise of the door
opening, Peredur awoke; and the maiden was weeping and lamenting.  “Tell
me, my sister,” said Peredur, “wherefore dost thou weep?”  “I will tell
thee, lord,” said she.  “My father possessed these dominions as their
chief, and this palace was his, and with it he held the best earldom in
the kingdom; then the son of another earl sought me of my father, and I
was not willing to be given unto him, and my father would not give me
against my will, either to him or any earl in the world.  And my father
had no child except myself.  And after my father’s death, these dominions
came into my own hands, and then was I less willing to accept him than
before.  So he made war upon me, and conquered all my possessions, except
this one house.  And through the valour of the men whom thou hast seen,
who are my foster-brothers, and the strength of the house, it can never
be taken while food and drink remain.  And now our provisions are
exhausted; but, as thou hast seen, we have been fed by the nuns, to whom
the country is free.  And at length they also are without supply of food
or liquor.  And at no later date than to-morrow, the earl will come
against this place with all his forces; and if I fall into his power, my
fate will be no better than to be given over to the grooms of his horses.
Therefore, lord, I am come to offer to place myself in thy hands, that
thou mayest succour me, either by taking me hence, or by defending me
here, whichever may seem best unto thee.”  “Go, my sister,” said he, “and
sleep; nor will I depart from thee until I do that which thou requirest,
or prove whether I can assist thee or not.”  The maiden went again to
rest; and the next morning she came to Peredur, and saluted him.  “Heaven
prosper thee, my soul, and what tidings dost thou bring?”  “None other,
than that the earl and all his forces have alighted at the gate, and I
never beheld any place so covered with tents, and thronged with knights
challenging others to the combat.”  “Truly,” said Peredur, “let my horse
be made ready.”  So his horse was accoutred, and he arose and sallied
forth to the meadow.  And there was a knight riding proudly along the
meadow, having raised the signal for battle.  And they encountered, and
Peredur threw the knight over his horse’s crupper to the ground.  And at
the close of the day, one of the chief knights came to fight with him,
and he overthrew him also, so that he besought his mercy.  “Who art
thou?” said Peredur.  “Verily,” said he, “I am Master of the Household to
the earl.”  “And how much of the countess’s possessions is there in thy
power?”  “The third part, verily,” answered he.  “Then,” said Peredur,
“restore to her the third of her possessions in full, and all the profit
thou hast made by them, and bring meat and drink for a hundred men, with
their horses and arms, to her court this night.  And thou shalt remain
her captive, unless she wish to take thy life.”  And this he did
forthwith.  And that night the maiden was right joyful, and they fared
plenteously.

And the next day Peredur rode forth to the meadow; and that day he
vanquished a multitude of the host.  And at the close of the day, there
came a proud and stately knight, and Peredur overthrew him, and he
besought his mercy.  “Who art thou?” said Peredur.  “I am Steward of the
Palace,” said he.  “And how much of the maiden’s possessions are under
thy control?”  “One-third part,” answered he.  “Verily,” said Peredur,
“thou shalt fully restore to the maiden her possessions, and, moreover,
thou shalt give her meat and drink for two hundred men, and their horses
and their arms.  And for thyself, thou shalt be her captive.”  And
immediately it was so done.

And the third day Peredur rode forth to the meadow; and he vanquished
more that day than on either of the preceding.  And at the close of the
day, an earl came to encounter him, and he overthrew him, and he besought
his mercy.  “Who art thou?” said Peredur.  “I am the earl,” said he.  “I
will not conceal it from thee.”  “Verily,” said Peredur, “thou shalt
restore the whole of the maiden’s earldom, and shalt give her thine own
earldom in addition thereto, and meat and drink for three hundred men,
and their horses and arms, and thou thyself shalt remain in her power.”
And thus it was fulfilled.  And Peredur tarried three weeks in the
country, causing tribute and obedience to be paid to the maiden, and the
government to be placed in her hands.  “With thy leave,” said Peredur, “I
will go hence.”  “Verily, my brother, desirest thou this?”  “Yes, by my
faith; and had it not been for love of thee, I should not have been here
thus long.”  “My soul,” said she, “who art thou?”  “I am Peredur the son
of Evrawc from the North; and if ever thou art in trouble or in danger,
acquaint me therewith, and if I can, I will protect thee.”

So Peredur rode forth.  And far thence there met him a lady, mounted on a
horse that was lean, and covered with sweat; and she saluted the youth.
“Whence comest thou, my sister?”  Then she told him the cause of her
journey.  Now she was the wife of the Lord of the Glade.  “Behold,” said
he, “I am the knight through whom thou art in trouble, and he shall
repent it, who has treated thee thus.”  Thereupon, behold a knight rode
up, and he inquired of Peredur, if he had seen a knight such as he was
seeking.  “Hold thy peace,” said Peredur, “I am he whom thou seekest; and
by my faith, thou deservest ill of thy household for thy treatment of the
maiden, for she is innocent concerning me.”  So they encountered, and
they were not long in combat ere Peredur overthrew the knight, and he
besought his mercy.  “Mercy thou shalt have,” said Peredur, “so thou wilt
return by the way thou camest, and declare that thou holdest the maiden
innocent, and so that thou wilt acknowledge unto her the reverse thou
hast sustained at my hands.”  And the knight plighted him his faith
thereto.

Then Peredur rode forward.  And above him he beheld a castle, and
thitherward he went.  And he struck upon the gate with his lance, and
then, behold, a comely auburn-haired youth opened the gate, and he had
the stature of a warrior, and the years of a boy.  And when Peredur came
into the hall, there was a tall and stately lady sitting in a chair, and
many handmaidens around her; and the lady rejoiced at his coming.  And
when it was time, they went to meat.  And after their repast was
finished, “It were well for thee, chieftain,” said she, “to go elsewhere
to sleep.”  “Wherefore can I not sleep here?” said Peredur.  “Nine
sorceresses are here, my soul, of the sorceresses of Gloucester, and
their father and their mother are with them; and unless we can make our
escape before daybreak, we shall be slain; and already they have
conquered and laid waste all the country, except this one dwelling.”
“Behold,” said Peredur, “I will remain here to-night, and if you are in
trouble, I will do you what service I can; but harm shall you not receive
from me.”  So they went to rest.  And with the break of day, Peredur
heard a dreadful outcry.  And he hastily arose, and went forth in his
vest and his doublet, with his sword about his neck, and he saw a
sorceress overtake one of the watch, who cried out violently.  Peredur
attacked the sorceress, and struck her upon the head with his sword, so
that he flattened her helmet and her head-piece like a dish upon her
head.  “Thy mercy, goodly Peredur, son of Evrawc, and the mercy of
Heaven.”  “How knowest thou, hag, that I am Peredur?”  “By destiny, and
the foreknowledge that I should suffer harm from thee.  And thou shalt
take a horse and armour of me; and with me thou shalt go to learn
chivalry and the use of thy arms.”  Said Peredur, “Thou shalt have mercy,
if thou pledge thy faith thou wilt never more injure the dominions of the
Countess.”  And Peredur took surety of this, and with permission of the
Countess, he set forth with the sorceress to the palace of the
sorceresses.  And there he remained for three weeks, and then he made
choice of a horse and arms, and went his way.

And in the evening he entered a valley, and at the head of the valley he
came to a hermit’s cell, and the hermit welcomed him gladly, and there he
spent the night.  And in the morning he arose, and when he went forth,
behold a shower of snow had fallen the night before, and a hawk had
killed a wild fowl in front of the cell.  And the noise of the horse
scared the hawk away, and a raven alighted upon the bird.  And Peredur
stood, and compared the blackness of the raven and the whiteness of the
snow, and the redness of the blood, to the hair of the lady that best he
loved, which was blacker than jet, and to her skin which was whiter than
the snow, and to the two red spots upon her cheeks, which were redder
than the blood upon the snow appeared to be.

Now Arthur and his household were in search of Peredur.  “Know ye,” said
Arthur, “who is the knight with the long spear that stands by the brook
up yonder?”  “Lord,” said one of them, “I will go and learn who he is.”
So the youth came to the place where Peredur was, and asked him what he
did thus, and who he was.  And from the intensity with which he thought
upon the lady whom best he loved, he gave him no answer.  Then the youth
thrust at Peredur with his lance, and Peredur turned upon him, and struck
him over his horse’s crupper to the ground.  And after this,
four-and-twenty youths came to him, and he did not answer one more than
another, but gave the same reception to all, bringing them with one
single thrust to the ground.  And then came Kai, and spoke to Peredur
rudely and angrily; and Peredur took him with his lance under the jaw,
and cast him from him with a thrust, so that he broke his arm and his
shoulder-blade, and he rode over him one-and-twenty times.  And while he
lay thus, stunned with the violence of the pain that he had suffered, his
horse returned back at a wild and prancing pace.  And when the household
saw the horse come back without his rider, they rode forth in haste to
the place where the encounter had been.  And when they first came there,
they thought that Kai was slain; but they found that if he had a skilful
physician, he yet might live.  And Peredur moved not from his meditation,
on seeing the concourse that was around Kai.  And Kai was brought to
Arthur’s tent, and Arthur caused skilful physicians to come to him.  And
Arthur was grieved that Kai had met with this reverse, for he loved him
greatly.

“Then,” said Gwalchmai, “it is not fitting that any should disturb an
honourable knight from his thought unadvisedly; for either he is
pondering some damage that he has sustained, or he is thinking of the
lady whom best he loves.  And through such ill-advised proceeding,
perchance this misadventure has befallen him who last met with him.  And
if it seem well to thee, lord, I will go and see if this knight hath
changed from his thought; and if he has, I will ask him courteously to
come and visit thee.”  Then Kai was wroth, and he spoke angry and
spiteful words.  “Gwalchmai,” said he, “I know that thou wilt bring him
because he is fatigued.  Little praise and honour, nevertheless, wilt
thou have from vanquishing a weary knight, who is tired with fighting.
Yet thus hast thou gained the advantage over many.  And while thy speech
and thy soft words last, a coat of thin linen were armour sufficient for
thee, and thou wilt not need to break either lance or sword in fighting
with the knight in the state he is in.”  Then said Gwalchmai to Kai,
“Thou mightest use more pleasant words, wert thou so minded: and it
behoves thee not upon me to wreak thy wrath and thy displeasure.
Methinks I shall bring the knight hither with me without breaking either
my arm or my shoulder.”  Then said Arthur to Gwalchmai, “Thou speakest
like a wise and prudent man; go, and take enough of armour about thee,
and choose thy horse.”  And Gwalchmai accoutred himself and rode forward
hastily to the place where Peredur was.

And Peredur was resting on the shaft of his spear, pondering the same
thought, and Gwalchmai came to him without any signs of hostility, and
said to him, “If I thought that it would be as agreeable to thee as it
would be to me, I would converse with thee.  I have also a message from
Arthur unto thee, to pray thee to come and visit him.  And two men have
been before on this errand.”  “That is true,” said Peredur, “and
uncourteously they came.  They attacked me, and I was annoyed thereat,
for it was not pleasing to me to be drawn from the thought that I was in,
for I was thinking of the lady whom best I love, and thus was she brought
to my mind:—I was looking upon the snow, and upon the raven, and upon the
drops of the blood of the bird that the hawk had killed upon the snow.
And I bethought me that her whiteness was like that of the snow, and that
the blackness of her hair and her eyebrows like that of the raven, and
that the two red spots upon her cheeks were like the two drops of blood.”
Said Gwalchmai, “This was not an ungentle thought, and I should marvel if
it were pleasant to thee to be drawn from it.”  “Tell me,” said Peredur,
“is Kai in Arthur’s Court?”  “He is,” said he, “and behold he is the
knight that fought with thee last; and it would have been better for him
had he not come, for his arm and his shoulder-blade were broken with the
fall which he had from thy spear.”  “Verily,” said Peredur, “I am not
sorry to have thus begun to avenge the insult to the dwarf and dwarfess.”
Then Gwalchmai marvelled to hear him speak of the dwarf and the dwarfess;
and he approached him, and threw his arms around his neck, and asked him
what was his name.  “Peredur the son of Evrawc am I called,” said he;
“and thou, Who art thou?”  “I am called Gwalchmai,” he replied.  “I am
right glad to meet with thee,” said Peredur, “for in every country where
I have been I have heard of thy fame for prowess and uprightness, and I
solicit thy fellowship.”  “Thou shalt have it, by my faith, and grant me
thine,” said he, “Gladly will I do so,” answered Peredur.

So they rode forth together joyfully towards the place where Arthur was,
and when Kai saw them coming, he said, “I knew that Gwalchmai needed not
to fight the knight.  And it is no wonder that he should gain fame; more
can he do by his fair words than I by the strength of my arm.”  And
Peredur went with Gwalchmai to his tent, and they took off their armour.
And Peredur put on garments like those that Gwalchmai wore, and they went
together unto Arthur, and saluted him.  “Behold, lord,” said Gwalchmai,
“him whom thou hast sought so long.”  “Welcome unto thee, chieftain,”
said Arthur.  “With me thou shalt remain; and had I known thy valour had
been such, thou shouldst not have left me as thou didst; nevertheless,
this was predicted of thee by the dwarf and the dwarfess, whom Kai
ill-treated and whom thou hast avenged.”  And hereupon, behold there came
the Queen and her handmaidens, and Peredur saluted them.  And they were
rejoiced to see him, and bade him welcome.  And Arthur did him great
honour and respect, and they returned towards Caerlleon.

And the first night Peredur came to Caerlleon to Arthur’s Court, and as
he walked in the city after his repast, behold, there met him Angharad
Law Eurawc.  “By my faith, sister,” said Peredur, “thou art a beauteous
and lovely maiden; and, were it pleasing to thee, I could love thee above
all women.”  “I pledge my faith,” said she, “that I do not love thee, nor
will I ever do so.”  “I also pledge my faith,” said Peredur, “that I will
never speak a word to any Christian again, until thou come to love me
above all men.”

The next day Peredur went forth by the high road, along a mountain-ridge,
and he saw a valley of a circular form, the confines of which were rocky
and wooded.  And the flat part of the valley was in meadows, and there
were fields betwixt the meadows and the wood.  And in the bosom of the
wood he saw large black houses of uncouth workmanship.  And he
dismounted, and led his horse towards the wood.  And a little way within
the wood he saw a rocky ledge, along which the road lay.  And upon the
ledge was a lion bound by a chain, and sleeping.  And beneath the lion he
saw a deep pit of immense size, full of the bones of men and animals.
And Peredur drew his sword and struck the lion, so that he fell into the
mouth of the pit and hung there by the chain; and with a second blow he
struck the chain and broke it, and the lion fell into the pit; and
Peredur led his horse over the rocky ledge, until he came into the
valley.  And in the centre of the valley he saw a fair castle, and he
went towards it.  And in the meadow by the castle he beheld a huge grey
man sitting, who was larger than any man he had ever before seen.  And
two young pages were shooting the hilts of their daggers, of the bone of
the sea-horse.  And one of the pages had red hair, and the other auburn.
And they went before him to the place where the grey man was, and Peredur
saluted him.  And the grey man said, “Disgrace to the beard of my
porter.”  Then Peredur understood that the porter was the lion.—And the
grey man and the pages went together into the castle, and Peredur
accompanied them; and he found it a fair and noble place.  And they
proceeded to the hall, and the tables were already laid, and upon them
was abundance of food and liquor.  And thereupon he saw an aged woman and
a young woman come from the chamber; and they were the most stately women
he had ever seen.  Then they washed and went to meat, and the grey man
sat in the upper seat at the head of the table, and the aged woman next
to him.  And Peredur and the maiden were placed together, and the two
young pages served them.  And the maiden gazed sorrowfully upon Peredur,
and Peredur asked the maiden wherefore she was sad.  “For thee, my soul;
for, from when I first beheld thee, I have loved thee above all men.  And
it pains me to know that so gentle a youth as thou should have such a
doom as awaits thee to-morrow.  Sawest thou the numerous black houses in
the bosom of the wood?  All these belong to the vassals of the grey man
yonder, who is my father.  And they are all giants.  And to-morrow they
will rise up against thee, and will slay thee.  And the Round Valley is
this valley called.”  “Listen, fair maiden, wilt thou contrive that my
horse and arms be in the same lodging with me to-night?”  “Gladly will I
cause it so to be, by Heaven, if I can.”

And when it was time for them to sleep rather than to carouse, they went
to rest.  And the maiden caused Peredur’s horse and arms to be in the
same lodging with him.  And the next morning Peredur heard a great tumult
of men and horses around the castle.  And Peredur arose, and armed
himself and his horse, and went to the meadow.  Then the aged woman and
the maiden came to the grey man: “Lord,” said they, “take the word of the
youth, that he will never disclose what he has seen in this place, and we
will be his sureties that he keep it.”  “I will not do so, by my faith,”
said the grey man.  So Peredur fought with the host, and towards evening
he had slain the one-third of them without receiving any hurt himself.
Then said the aged woman, “Behold, many of thy host have been slain by
the youth; do thou, therefore, grant him mercy.”  “I will not grant it,
by my faith,” said he.  And the aged woman and the fair maiden were upon
the battlements of the castle, looking forth.  And at that juncture,
Peredur encountered the yellow-haired youth and slew him.  “Lord,” said
the maiden, “grant the young man mercy.”  “That will I not do, by
Heaven,” he replied; and thereupon Peredur attacked the auburn-haired
youth, and slew him likewise.  “It were better that thou hadst accorded
mercy to the youth before he had slain thy two sons; for now scarcely
wilt thou thyself escape from him.”  “Go, maiden, and beseech the youth
to grant mercy unto us, for we yield ourselves into his hands.”  So the
maiden came to the place where Peredur was, and besought mercy for her
father, and for all such of his vassals as had escaped alive.  “Thou
shalt have it, on condition that thy father and all that are under him go
and render homage to Arthur, and tell him that it was his vassal Peredur
that did him this service.”  “This will we do willingly, by Heaven.”
“And you shall also receive baptism; and I will send to Arthur, and
beseech him to bestow this valley upon thee and upon thy heirs after thee
for ever.”  Then they went in, and the grey man and the tall woman
saluted Peredur.  And the grey man said unto him, “Since I have possessed
this valley I have not seen any Christian depart with his life, save
thyself.  And we will go to do homage to Arthur, and to embrace the faith
and be baptized.”  Then said Peredur, “To Heaven I render thanks that I
have not broken my vow to the lady that best I love, which was, that I
would not speak one word unto any Christian.”

That night they tarried there.  And the next day, in the morning, the
grey man, with his company, set forth to Arthur’s Court; and they did
homage unto Arthur, and he caused them to be baptized.  And the grey man
told Arthur that it was Peredur that had vanquished them.  And Arthur
gave the valley to the grey man and his company, to hold it of him as
Peredur had besought.  And with Arthur’s permission, the grey man went
back to the Round Valley.

Peredur rode forward next day, and he traversed a vast tract of desert,
in which no dwellings were.  And at length he came to a habitation, mean
and small.  And there he heard that there was a serpent that lay upon a
gold ring, and suffered none to inhabit the country for seven miles
around.  And Peredur came to the place where he heard the serpent was.
And angrily, furiously, and desperately fought he with the serpent; and
at last he killed it, and took away the ring.  And thus he was for a long
time without speaking a word to any Christian.  And therefrom he lost his
colour and his aspect, through extreme longing after the Court of Arthur,
and the society of the lady whom best he loved, and of his companions.
Then he proceeded forward to Arthur’s Court, and on the road there met
him Arthur’s household going on a particular errand, with Kai at their
head.  And Peredur knew them all, but none of the household recognized
him.  “Whence comest thou, chieftain?” said Kai.  And this he asked him
twice and three times, and he answered him not.  And Kai thrust him
through the thigh with his lance.  And lest he should be compelled to
speak, and to break his vow, he went on without stopping.  “Then,” said
Gwalchmai, “I declare to Heaven, Kai, that thou hast acted ill in
committing such an outrage on a youth like this, who cannot speak.”

And Gwalchmai returned back to Arthur’s Court.  “Lady,” said he to
Gwenhwyvar, “seest thou how wicked an outrage Kai has committed upon this
youth who cannot speak; for Heaven’s sake, and for mine, cause him to
have medical care before I come back, and I will repay thee the charge.”

And before the men returned from their errand, a knight came to the
meadow beside Arthur’s Palace, to dare some one to the encounter.  And
his challenge was accepted; and Peredur fought with him, and overthrew
him.  And for a week he overthrew one knight every day.

And one day, Arthur and his household were going to Church, and they
beheld a knight who had raised the signal for combat.  “Verily,” said
Arthur, “by the valour of men, I will not go hence until I have my horse
and my arms to overthrow yonder boor.”  Then went the attendants to fetch
Arthur’s horse and arms.  And Peredur met the attendants as they were
going back, and he took the horse and arms from them, and proceeded to
the meadow; and all those who saw him arise and go to do battle with the
knight, went upon the tops of the houses, and the mounds, and the high
places, to behold the combat.  And Peredur beckoned with his hand to the
knight to commence the fight.  And the knight thrust at him, but he was
not thereby moved from where he stood.  And Peredur spurred his horse,
and ran at him wrathfully, furiously, fiercely, desperately, and with
mighty rage, and he gave him a thrust, deadly-wounding, severe, furious,
adroit, and strong, under his jaw, and raised him out of his saddle, and
cast him a long way from him.  And Peredur went back, and left the horse
and the arms with the attendant as before, and he went on foot to the
Palace.

Then Peredur went by the name of the Dumb Youth.  And behold, Angharad
Law Eurawc met him.  “I declare to Heaven, chieftain,” said she, “woful
is it that thou canst not speak; for couldst thou speak, I would love
thee best of all men; and by my faith, although thou canst not, I do love
thee above all.”  “Heaven reward thee, my sister,” said Peredur, “by my
faith I also do love thee.”  Thereupon it was known that he was Peredur.
And then he held fellowship with Gwalchmai, and Owain the son of Urien,
and all the household, and he remained in Arthur’s Court.

                                * * * * *

Arthur was in Caerlleon upon Usk; and he went to hunt, and Peredur went
with him.  And Peredur let loose his dog upon a hart, and the dog killed
the hart in a desert place.  And a short space from him he saw signs of a
dwelling, and towards the dwelling he went, and he beheld a hall, and at
the door of the hall he found bald swarthy youths playing at chess.  And
when he entered, he beheld three maidens sitting on a bench, and they
were all clothed alike, as became persons of high rank.  And he came, and
sat by them upon the bench; and one of the maidens looked steadfastly
upon Peredur, and wept.  And Peredur asked her wherefore she was weeping.
“Through grief, that I should see so fair a youth as thou art, slain.”
“Who will slay me?” inquired Peredur.  “If thou art so daring as to
remain here to-night, I will tell thee.”  “How great soever my danger may
be from remaining here, I will listen unto thee.”  “This Palace is owned
by him who is my father,” said the maiden, “and he slays every one who
comes hither without his leave.”  “What sort of a man is thy father, that
he is able to slay every one thus?”  “A man who does violence and wrong
unto his neighbours, and who renders justice unto none.”  And hereupon he
saw the youths arise and clear the chessmen from the board.  And he heard
a great tumult; and after the tumult there came in a huge black one-eyed
man, and the maidens arose to meet him.  And they disarrayed him, and he
went and sat down; and after he had rested and pondered awhile, he looked
at Peredur, and asked who the knight was.  “Lord,” said one of the
maidens, “he is the fairest and gentlest youth that ever thou didst see.
And for the sake of Heaven, and of thine own dignity, have patience with
him.”  “For thy sake I will have patience, and I will grant him his life
this night.”  Then Peredur came towards them to the fire, and partook of
food and liquor, and entered into discourse with the ladies.  And being
elated with the liquor, he said to the black man, “It is a marvel to me,
so mighty as thou sayest thou art, who could have put out thine eye.”
“It is one of my habits,” said the black man, “that whosoever puts to me
the question which thou hast asked, shall not escape with his life,
either as a free gift or for a price.”  “Lord,” said the maiden,
“whatsoever he may say to thee in jest, and through the excitement of
liquor, make good that which thou saidst and didst promise me just now.”
“I will do so, gladly, for thy sake,” said he.  “Willingly will I grant
him his life this night.”  And that night thus they remained.

And the next day the black man got up, and put on his armour, and said to
Peredur, “Arise, man, and suffer death.”  And Peredur said unto him, “Do
one of two things, black man; if thou wilt fight with me, either throw
off thy own armour, or give arms to me, that I may encounter thee.”  “Ha,
man,” said he, “couldst thou fight, if thou hadst arms?  Take, then, what
arms thou dost choose.”  And thereupon the maiden came to Peredur with
such arms as pleased him; and he fought with the black man, and forced
him to crave his mercy.  “Black man, thou shalt have mercy, provided thou
tell me who thou art, and who put out thine eye.”  “Lord, I will tell
thee; I lost it in fighting with the Black Serpent of the Carn.  There is
a mound, which is called the Mound of Mourning; and on the mound there is
a carn, and in the carn there is a serpent, and on the tail of the
serpent there is a stone, and the virtues of the stone are such, that
whosoever should hold it in one hand, in the other he will have as much
gold as he may desire.  And in fighting with this serpent was it that I
lost my eye.  And the Black Oppressor am I called.  And for this reason I
am called the Black Oppressor, that there is not a single man around me
whom I have not oppressed, and justice have I done unto none.”  “Tell
me,” said Peredur, “how far is it hence?”  “The same day that thou
settest forth, thou wilt come to the Palace of the Sons of the King of
the Tortures.”  “Wherefore are they called thus?”  “The Addanc of the
Lake slays them once every day.  When thou goest thence, thou wilt come
to the Court of the Countess of the Achievements.”  “What achievements
are there?” asked Peredur.  “Three hundred men there are in her
household, and unto every stranger that comes to the Court, the
achievements of her household are related.  And this is the manner of
it,—the three hundred men of the household sit next unto the Lady; and
that not through disrespect unto the guests, but that they may relate the
achievements of the household.  And the day that thou goest thence, thou
wilt reach the Mound of Mourning, and round about the mound there are the
owners of three hundred tents guarding the serpent.”  “Since thou hast,
indeed, been an oppressor so long,” said Peredur, “I will cause that thou
continue so no longer.”  So he slew him.

Then the maiden spoke, and began to converse with him.  “If thou wast
poor when thou camest here, henceforth thou wilt be rich through the
treasure of the black man whom thou hast slain.  Thou seest the many
lovely maidens that there are in this Court; thou shalt have her whom
thou best likest for the lady of thy love.”  “Lady, I came not hither
from my country to woo; but match yourselves as it liketh you with the
comely youths I see here; and none of your goods do I desire, for I need
them not.”  Then Peredur rode forward, and he came to the Palace of the
Sons of the King of the Tortures; and when he entered the Palace, he saw
none but women; and they rose up, and were joyful at his coming; and as
they began to discourse with him, he beheld a charger arrive, with a
saddle upon it, and a corpse in the saddle.  And one of the women arose,
and took the corpse from the saddle, and anointed it in a vessel of warm
water, which was below the door, and placed precious balsam upon it; and
the man rose up alive, and came to the place where Peredur was, and
greeted him, and was joyful to see him.  And two other men came in upon
their saddles, and the maiden treated these two in the same manner as she
had done the first.  Then Peredur asked the chieftain wherefore it was
thus.  And they told him, that there was an Addanc in a cave, which slew
them once every day.  And thus they remained that night.

And next morning the youths arose to sally forth, and Peredur besought
them, for the sake of the ladies of their love, to permit him to go with
them; but they refused him, saying, “If thou shouldst be slain there,
thou hast none to bring thee back to life again.”  And they rode forward,
and Peredur followed after them; and, after they had disappeared out of
his sight, he came to a mound, whereon sat the fairest lady he had ever
beheld.  “I know thy quest,” said she; “thou art going to encounter the
Addanc, and he will slay thee, and that not by courage, but by craft.  He
has a cave, and at the entrance of the cave there is a stone pillar, and
he sees every one that enters, and none see him; and from behind the
pillar he slays every one with a poisonous dart.  And if thou wouldst
pledge me thy faith to love me above all women, I would give thee a
stone, by which thou shouldst see him when thou goest in, and he should
not see thee.”  “I will, by my troth,” said Peredur, “for when first I
beheld thee I loved thee; and where shall I seek thee?”  “When thou
seekest me, seek towards India.”  And the maiden vanished, after placing
the stone in Peredur’s hand.

And he came towards a valley, through which ran a river; and the borders
of the valley were wooded, and on each side of the river were level
meadows.  And on one side of the river he saw a flock of white sheep, and
on the other a flock of black sheep.  And whenever one of the white sheep
bleated, one of the black sheep would cross over and become white; and
when one of the black sheep bleated, one of the white sheep would cross
over and become black.  And he saw a tall tree by the side of the river,
one half of which was in flames from the root to the top, and the other
half was green and in full leaf.  And nigh thereto he saw a youth sitting
upon a mound, and two greyhounds, white-breasted and spotted, in leashes,
lying by his side.  And certain was he that he had never seen a youth of
so royal a bearing as he.  And in the wood opposite he heard hounds
raising a herd of deer.  And Peredur saluted the youth, and the youth
greeted him in return.  And there were three roads leading from the
mound; two of them were wide roads, and the third was more narrow.  And
Peredur inquired where the three roads went.  “One of them goes to my
palace,” said the youth; “and one of two things I counsel thee to do;
either to proceed to my palace, which is before thee, and where thou wilt
find my wife, or else to remain here to see the hounds chasing the roused
deer from the wood to the plain.  And thou shalt see the best greyhounds
thou didst ever behold, and the boldest in the chase, kill them by the
water beside us; and when it is time to go to meat, my page will come
with my horse to meet me, and thou shalt rest in my palace to-night.”
“Heaven reward thee; but I cannot tarry, for onward must I go.”  “The
other road leads to the town, which is near here, and wherein food and
liquor may be bought; and the road which is narrower than the others goes
towards the cave of the Addanc.”  “With thy permission, young man, I will
go that way.”

And Peredur went towards the cave.  And he took the stone in his left
hand, and his lance in his right.  And as he went in he perceived the
Addanc, and he pierced him through with his lance, and cut off his head.
And as he came from the cave, behold the three companions were at the
entrance; and they saluted Peredur, and told him that there was a
prediction that he should slay that monster.  And Peredur gave the head
to the young men, and they offered him in marriage whichever of the three
sisters he might choose, and half their kingdom with her.  “I came not
hither to woo,” said Peredur, “but if peradventure I took a wife, I
should prefer your sister to all others.”  And Peredur rode forward, and
he heard a noise behind him.  And he looked back, and saw a man upon a
red horse, with red armour upon him; and the man rode up by his side, and
saluted him, and wished him the favour of Heaven and of man.  And Peredur
greeted the youth kindly.  “Lord, I come to make a request unto thee.”
“What wouldest thou?”  “That thou shouldest take me as thine attendant.”
“Whom then should I take as my attendant, if I did so?”  “I will not
conceal from thee what kindred I am of.  Etlym Gleddyv Coch am I called,
an Earl from the East Country.”  “I marvel that thou shouldest offer to
become attendant to a man whose possessions are no greater than thine
own; for I have but an earldom like thyself.  But since thou desirest to
be my attendant, I will take thee joyfully.”

And they went forward to the Court of the Countess, and all they of the
Court were glad at their coming; and they were told it was not through
disrespect they were placed below the household, but that such was the
usage of the Court.  For, whoever should overthrow the three hundred men
of her household, would sit next the Countess, and she would love him
above all men.  And Peredur having overthrown the three hundred men of
her household, sat down beside her, and the Countess said, “I thank
Heaven that I have a youth so fair and so valiant as thou, since I have
not obtained the man whom best I love.”  “Who is he whom best thou
lovest?”  “By my faith, Etlym Gleddyv Coch is the man whom I love best,
and I have never seen him.”  “Of a truth, Etlym is my companion; and
behold here he is, and for his sake did I come to joust with thy
household.  And he could have done so better than I, had it pleased him.
And I do give thee unto him.”  “Heaven reward thee, fair youth, and I
will take the man whom I love above all others.”  And the Countess became
Etlym’s bride from that moment.

And the next day Peredur set forth towards the Mound of Mourning.  “By
thy hand, lord, but I will go with thee,” said Etlym.  Then they went
forwards till they came in sight of the mound and the tents.  “Go unto
yonder men,” said Peredur to Etlym, “and desire them to come and do me
homage.”  So Etlym went unto them, and said unto them thus,—“Come and do
homage to my lord.”  “Who is thy lord?” said they.  “Peredur with the
long lance is my lord,” said Etlym.  “Were it permitted to slay a
messenger, thou shouldest not go back to thy lord alive, for making unto
Kings, and Earls, and Barons so arrogant a demand as to go and do him
homage.”  Peredur desired him to go back to them, and to give them their
choice, either to do him homage, or to do battle with him.  And they
chose rather to do battle.  And that day Peredur overthrew the owners of
a hundred tents; and the next day he overthrew the owners of a hundred
more; and the third day the remaining hundred took counsel to do homage
to Peredur.  And Peredur inquired of them, wherefore they were there.
And they told him they were guarding the serpent until he should die.
“For then should we fight for the stone among ourselves, and whoever
should be conqueror among us would have the stone.”  “Await here,” said
Peredur, “and I will go to encounter the serpent.”  “Not so, lord,” said
they; “we will go altogether to encounter the serpent.”  “Verily,” said
Peredur, “that will I not permit; for if the serpent be slain, I shall
derive no more fame therefrom than one of you.”  Then he went to the
place where the serpent was, and slew it, and came back to them, and
said, “Reckon up what you have spent since you have been here, and I will
repay you to the full.”  And he paid to each what he said was his claim.
And he required of them only that they should acknowledge themselves his
vassals.  And he said to Etlym, “Go back unto her whom thou lovest best,
and I will go forwards, and I will reward thee for having been my
attendant.”  And he gave Etlym the stone.  “Heaven repay thee and prosper
thee,” said Etlym.

And Peredur rode thence, and he came to the fairest valley he had ever
seen, through which ran a river; and there he beheld many tents of
various colours.  And he marvelled still more at the number of
water-mills and of wind-mills that he saw.  And there rode up with him a
tall auburn-haired man, in workman’s garb, and Peredur inquired of him
who he was.  “I am the chief miller,” said he, “of all the mills yonder.”
“Wilt thou give me lodging?” said Peredur.  “I will, gladly,” he
answered.  And Peredur came to the miller’s house, and the miller had a
fair and pleasant dwelling.  And Peredur asked money as a loan from the
miller, that he might buy meat and liquor for himself and for the
household, and he promised that he would pay him again ere he went
thence.  And he inquired of the miller, wherefore such a multitude was
there assembled.  Said the miller to Peredur, “One thing is certain:
either thou art a man from afar, or thou art beside thyself.  The Empress
of Cristinobyl the Great is here; and she will have no one but the man
who is most valiant; for riches does she not require.  And it was
impossible to bring food for so many thousands as are here, therefore
were all these mills constructed.”  And that night they took their rest.

And the next day Peredur arose, and he equipped himself and his horse for
the tournament.  And among the other tents he beheld one, which was the
fairest he had ever seen.  And he saw a beauteous maiden leaning her head
out of a window of the tent, and he had never seen a maiden more lovely
than she.  And upon her was a garment of satin.  And he gazed fixedly on
the maiden, and began to love her greatly.  And he remained there, gazing
upon the maiden from morning until mid-day, and from mid-day until
evening; and then the tournament was ended and he went to his lodging and
drew off his armour.  Then he asked money of the miller as a loan, and
the miller’s wife was wroth with Peredur; nevertheless, the miller lent
him the money.  And the next day he did in like manner as he had done the
day before.  And at night he came to his lodging, and took money as a
loan from the miller.  And the third day, as he was in the same place,
gazing upon the maiden, he felt a hard blow between the neck and the
shoulder, from the edge of an axe.  And when he looked behind him, he saw
that it was the miller; and the miller said to him, “Do one of two
things: either turn thy head from hence, or go to the tournament.”  And
Peredur smiled on the miller, and went to the tournament; and all that
encountered him that day he overthrew.  And as many as he vanquished he
sent as a gift to the Empress, and their horses and arms he sent as a
gift to the wife of the miller, in payment of the borrowed money.
Peredur attended the tournament until all were overthrown, and he sent
all the men to the prison of the Empress, and the horses and arms to the
wife of the miller, in payment of the borrowed money.  And the Empress
sent to the Knight of the Mill, to ask him to come and visit her.  And
Peredur went not for the first nor for the second message.  And the third
time she sent a hundred knights to bring him against his will, and they
went to him and told him their mission from the Empress.  And Peredur
fought well with them, and caused them to be bound like stags, and thrown
into the mill-dyke.  And the Empress sought advice of a wise man who was
in her counsel; and he said to her, “With thy permission, I will go to
him myself.”  So he came to Peredur, and saluted him, and besought him,
for the sake of the lady of his love, to come and visit the Empress.  And
they went, together with the miller.  And Peredur went and sat down in
the outer chamber of the tent, and she came and placed herself by his
side.  And there was but little discourse between them.  And Peredur took
his leave, and went to his lodging.

And the next day he came to visit her, and when he came into the tent
there was no one chamber less decorated than the others.  And they knew
not where he would sit.  And Peredur went and sat beside the Empress, and
discoursed with her courteously.  And while they were thus, they beheld a
black man enter with a goblet full of wine in his hand.  And he dropped
upon his knee before the Empress, and besought her to give it to no one
who would not fight with him for it.  And she looked upon Peredur.
“Lady,” said he, “bestow on me the goblet.”  And Peredur drank the wine,
and gave the goblet to the miller’s wife.  And while they were thus,
behold there entered a black man of larger stature than the other, with a
wild beast’s claw in his hand, wrought into the form of a goblet and
filled with wine.  And he presented it to the Empress, and besought her
to give it to no one but the man who would fight with him.  “Lady,” said
Peredur, “bestow it on me.”  And she gave it to him.  And Peredur drank
the wine, and sent the goblet to the wife of the miller.  And while they
were thus, behold a rough-looking, crisp-haired man, taller than either
of the others, came in with a bowl in his hand full of wine; and he bent
upon his knee, and gave it into the hands of the Empress, and he besought
her to give it to none but him who would fight with him for it; and she
gave it to Peredur, and he sent it to the miller’s wife.  And that night
Peredur returned to his lodging; and the next day he accoutred himself
and his horse, and went to the meadow and slew the three men.  Then
Peredur proceeded to the tent, and the Empress said to him, “Goodly
Peredur, remember the faith thou didst pledge me when I gave thee the
stone, and thou didst kill the Addanc.”  “Lady,” answered he, “thou
sayest truth, I do remember it.”  And Peredur was entertained by the
Empress fourteen years, as the story relates.

                                * * * * *

Arthur was at Caerlleon upon Usk, his principal palace; and in the centre
of the floor of the hall were four men sitting on a carpet of velvet,
Owain the son of Urien, and Gwalchmai the son of Gwyar, and Howel the son
of Emyr Llydaw, and Peredur of the long lance.  And thereupon they saw a
black curly-headed maiden enter, riding upon a yellow mule, with jagged
thongs in her hand to urge it on; and having a rough and hideous aspect.
Blacker were her face and her two hands than the blackest iron covered
with pitch; and her hue was not more frightful than her form.  High
cheeks had she, and a face lengthened downwards, and a short nose with
distended nostrils.  And one eye was of a piercing mottled grey, and the
other was as black as jet, deep-sunk in her head.  And her teeth were
long and yellow, more yellow were they than the flower of the broom.  And
her stomach rose from the breast-bone, higher than her chin.  And her
back was in the shape of a crook, and her legs were large and bony.  And
her figure was very thin and spare, except her feet and her legs, which
were of huge size.  And she greeted Arthur and all his household except
Peredur.  And to Peredur she spoke harsh and angry words.  “Peredur, I
greet thee not, seeing that thou dost not merit it.  Blind was fate in
giving thee fame and favour.  When thou wast in the Court of the Lame
King, and didst see there the youth bearing the streaming spear, from the
points of which were drops of blood flowing in streams, even to the hand
of the youth, and many other wonders likewise, thou didst not inquire
their meaning nor their cause.  Hadst thou done so, the King would have
been restored to health, and his dominions to peace.  Whereas from
henceforth, he will have to endure battles and conflicts, and his knights
will perish, and wives will be widowed, and maidens will be left
portionless, and all this is because of thee.”  Then said she unto
Arthur, “May it please thee, lord, my dwelling is far hence, in the
stately castle of which thou hast heard, and therein are five hundred and
sixty-six knights of the order of Chivalry, and the lady whom best he
loves with each; and whoever would acquire fame in arms, and encounters,
and conflicts, he will gain it there, if he deserve it.  And whoso would
reach the summit of fame and of honour, I know where he may find it.
There is a castle on a lofty mountain, and there is a maiden therein, and
she is detained a prisoner there, and whoever shall set her free will
attain the summit of the fame of the world.”  And thereupon she rode
away.

Said Gwalchmai, “By my faith, I will not rest tranquilly until I have
proved if I can release the maiden.”  And many of Arthur’s household
joined themselves with him.  Then, likewise, said Peredur, “By my faith,
I will not rest tranquilly until I know the story and the meaning of the
lance whereof the black maiden spoke.”  And while they were equipping
themselves, behold a knight came to the gate.  And he had the size and
the strength of a warrior, and was equipped with arms and habiliments.
And he went forward, and saluted Arthur and all his household, except
Gwalchmai.  And the knight had upon his shoulder a shield, ingrained with
gold, with a fesse of azure blue upon it, and his whole armour was of the
same hue.  And he said to Gwalchmai, “Thou didst slay my lord by thy
treachery and deceit, and that will I prove upon thee.”  Then Gwalchmai
rose up.  “Behold,” said he, “here is my gage against thee, to maintain,
either in this place or wherever else thou wilt, that I am not a traitor
or deceiver.”  “Before the King whom I obey, will I that my encounter
with thee take place,” said the knight.  “Willingly,” said Gwalchmai; “go
forward, and I will follow thee.”  So the knight went forth, and
Gwalchmai accoutred himself, and there was offered unto him abundance of
armour, but he would take none but his own.  And when Gwalchmai and
Peredur were equipped, they set forth to follow him, by reason of their
fellowship and of the great friendship that was between them.  And they
did not go after him in company together, but each went his own way.

At the dawn of day Gwalchmai came to a valley, and in the valley he saw a
fortress, and within the fortress a vast palace and lofty towers around
it.  And he beheld a knight coming out to hunt from the other side,
mounted on a spirited black snorting palfrey, that advanced at a prancing
pace, proudly stepping, and nimbly bounding, and sure of foot; and this
was the man to whom the palace belonged.  And Gwalchmai saluted him.
“Heaven prosper thee, chieftain,” said he, “and whence comest thou?”  “I
come,” answered Gwalchmai, “from the Court of Arthur.”  “And art thou
Arthur’s vassal?”  “Yes, by my faith,” said Gwalchmai.  “I will give thee
good counsel,” said the knight.  “I see that thou art tired and weary; go
unto my palace, if it may please thee, and tarry there to-night.”
“Willingly, lord,” said he, “and Heaven reward thee.”  “Take this ring as
a token to the porter, and go forward to yonder tower, and therein thou
wilt find my sister.”  And Gwalchmai went to the gate, and showed the
ring, and proceeded to the tower.  And on entering he beheld a large
blazing fire, burning without smoke and with a bright and lofty flame,
and a beauteous and stately maiden was sitting on a chair by the fire.
And the maiden was glad at his coming, and welcomed him, and advanced to
meet him.  And he went and sat beside the maiden, and they took their
repast.  And when their repast was over, they discoursed pleasantly
together.  And while they were thus, behold there entered a venerable
hoary-headed man.  “Ah! base girl,” said he, “if thou didst think it was
right for thee to entertain and to sit by yonder man, thou wouldest not
do so.”  And he withdrew his head, and went forth.  “Ah! chieftain,” said
the maiden, “if thou wilt do as I counsel thee, thou wilt shut the door,
lest the man should have a plot against thee.”  Upon that Gwalchmai
arose, and when he came near unto the door, the man, with sixty others,
fully armed, were ascending the tower.  And Gwalchmai defended the door
with a chessboard, that none might enter until the man should return from
the chase.  And thereupon, behold the Earl arrived.  “What is all this?”
asked he.  “It is a sad thing,” said the hoary-headed man; “the young
girl yonder has been sitting and eating with him who slew your father.
He is Gwalchmai, the son of Gwyar.”  “Hold thy peace, then,” said the
Earl, “I will go in.”  And the Earl was joyful concerning Gwalchmai.
“Ha! chieftain,” said he, “it was wrong of thee to come to my court, when
thou knewest that thou didst slay my father; and though we cannot avenge
him, Heaven will avenge him upon thee.”  “My soul,” said Gwalchmai, “thus
it is: I came not here either to acknowledge or to deny having slain thy
father; but I am on a message from Arthur, and therefore do I crave the
space of a year until I shall return from my embassy, and then, upon my
faith, I will come back unto this palace, and do one of two things,
either acknowledge it, or deny it.”  And the time was granted him
willingly; and he remained there that night.  And the next morning he
rode forth.  And the story relates nothing further of Gwalchmai
respecting this adventure.

And Peredur rode forward.  And he wandered over the whole island, seeking
tidings of the black maiden, and he could meet with none.  And he came to
an unknown land, in the centre of a valley, watered by a river.  And as
he traversed the valley he beheld a horseman coming towards him, and
wearing the garments of a priest; and he besought his blessing.
“Wretched man,” said he, “thou meritest no blessing, and thou wouldest
not be profited by one, seeing that thou art clad in armour on such a day
as this.”  “And what day is to-day?” said Peredur.  “To-day is Good
Friday,” he answered.  “Chide me not that I knew not this, seeing that it
is a year to-day since I journeyed forth from my country.”  Then he
dismounted, and led his horse in his hand.  And he had not proceeded far
along the high road before he came to a cross road, and the cross road
traversed a wood.  And on the other side of the wood he saw an
unfortified castle, which appeared to be inhabited.  And at the gate of
the castle there met him the priest whom he had seen before, and he asked
his blessing.  “The blessing of Heaven be unto thee,” said he, “it is
more fitting to travel in thy present guise than as thou wast erewhile;
and this night thou shalt tarry with me.”  So he remained there that
night.

And the next day Peredur sought to go forth.  “To-day may no one journey.
Thou shalt remain with me to-day and to-morrow, and the day following,
and I will direct thee as best I may to the place which thou art
seeking.”  And the fourth day Peredur sought to go forth, and he
entreated the priest to tell him how he should find the Castle of
Wonders.  “What I know thereof I will tell thee,” he replied.  “Go over
yonder mountain, and on the other side of the mountain thou wilt come to
a river, and in the valley wherein the river runs is a King’s palace,
wherein the King sojourned during Easter.  And if thou mayest have
tidings anywhere of the Castle of Wonders, thou wilt have them there.”

Then Peredur rode forward.  And he came to the valley in which was the
river, and there met him a number of men going to hunt, and in the midst
of them was a man of exalted rank, and Peredur saluted him.  “Choose,
chieftain,” said the man, “whether thou wilt go with me to the chase, or
wilt proceed to my palace, and I will dispatch one of my household to
commend thee to my daughter, who is there, and who will entertain thee
with food and liquor until I return from hunting; and whatever may be
thine errand, such as I can obtain for thee thou shalt gladly have.”  And
the King sent a little yellow page with him as an attendant; and when
they came to the palace the lady had arisen, and was about to wash before
meat.  Peredur went forward, and she saluted him joyfully, and placed him
by her side.  And they took their repast.  And whatsoever Peredur said
unto her, she laughed loudly, so that all in the palace could hear.  Then
spoke the yellow page to the lady.  “By my faith,” said he, “this youth
is already thy husband; or if he be not, thy mind and thy thoughts are
set upon him.”  And the little yellow page went unto the King, and told
him that it seemed to him that the youth whom he had met with was his
daughter’s husband, or if he were not so already that he would shortly
become so unless he were cautious.  “What is thy counsel in this matter,
youth?” said the King.  “My counsel is,” he replied, “that thou set
strong men upon him, to seize him, until thou hast ascertained the truth
respecting this.”  So he set strong men upon Peredur, who seized him and
cast him into prison.  And the maiden went before her father, and asked
him wherefore he had caused the youth from Arthur’s Court to be
imprisoned.  “In truth,” he answered, “he shall not be free to-night, nor
to-morrow, nor the day following, and he shall not come from where he
is.”  She replied not to what the King had said, but she went to the
youth.  “Is it unpleasant to thee to be here?” said she.  “I should not
care if I were not,” he replied.  “Thy couch and thy treatment shall be
in no wise inferior to that of the King himself, and thou shalt have the
best entertainment that the palace affords.  And if it were more pleasing
to thee that my couch should be here, that I might discourse with thee,
it should be so, cheerfully.”  “This can I not refuse,” said Peredur.
And he remained in prison that night.  And the maiden provided all that
she had promised him.

And the next day Peredur heard a tumult in the town.  “Tell me, fair
maiden, what is that tumult?” said Peredur.  “All the King’s hosts and
his forces have come to the town to-day.”  “And what seek they here?” he
inquired.  “There is an Earl near this place who possesses two Earldoms,
and is as powerful as a King; and an engagement will take place between
them to-day.”  “I beseech thee,” said Peredur, “to cause a horse and arms
to be brought, that I may view the encounter, and I promise to come back
to my prison again.”  “Gladly,” said she, “will I provide thee with horse
and arms.”  So she gave him a horse and arms, and a bright scarlet robe
of honour over his armour, and a yellow shield upon his shoulder.  And he
went to the combat; and as many of the Earl’s men as encountered him that
day he overthrew; and he returned to his prison.  And the maiden asked
tidings of Peredur, and he answered her not a word.  And she went and
asked tidings of her father, and inquired who had acquitted himself best
of the household.  And he said that he knew not, but that it was a man
with a scarlet robe of honour over his armour, and a yellow shield upon
his shoulder.  Then she smiled, and returned to where Peredur was, and
did him great honour that night.  And for three days did Peredur slay the
Earl’s men; and before any one could know who he was, he returned to his
prison.  And the fourth day Peredur slew the Earl himself.  And the
maiden went unto her father, and inquired of him the news.  “I have good
news for thee,” said the King; “the Earl is slain, and I am the owner of
his two Earldoms.”  “Knowest thou, lord, who slew him?”  “I do not know,”
said the King.  “It was the knight with the scarlet robe of honour and
the yellow shield.”  “Lord,” said she, “I know who that is.”  “By
Heaven!” he exclaimed, “who is he?”  “Lord,” she replied, “he is the
knight whom thou hast imprisoned.”  Then he went unto Peredur, and
saluted him, and told him that he would reward the service he had done
him, in any way he might desire.  And when they went to meat, Peredur was
placed beside the King, and the maiden on the other side of Peredur.  “I
will give thee,” said the King, “my daughter in marriage, and half my
kingdom with her, and the two Earldoms as a gift.”  “Heaven reward thee,
lord,” said Peredur, “but I came not here to woo.”  “What seekest thou
then, chieftain?”  “I am seeking tidings of the Castle of Wonders.”  “Thy
enterprise is greater, chieftain, than thou wilt wish to pursue,” said
the maiden, “nevertheless, tidings shalt thou have of the Castle, and
thou shalt have a guide through my father’s dominions, and a sufficiency
of provisions for thy journey, for thou art, O chieftain, the man whom
best I love.”  Then she said to him, “Go over yonder mountain, and thou
wilt find a lake, and in the middle of the lake there is a Castle, and
that is the Castle that is called the Castle of Wonders; and we know not
what wonders are therein, but thus is it called.”

And Peredur proceeded towards the Castle, and the gate of the Castle was
open.  And when he came to the hall, the door was open, and he entered.
And he beheld a chessboard in the hall, and the chessmen were playing
against each other, by themselves.  And the side that he favoured lost
the game, and thereupon the others set up a shout, as though they had
been living men.  And Peredur was wroth, and took the chessmen in his
lap, and cast the chessboard into the lake.  And when he had done thus,
behold the black maiden came in, and she said to him, “The welcome of
Heaven be not unto thee.  Thou hadst rather do evil than good.”  “What
complaint hast thou against me, maiden?” said Peredur.  “That thou hast
occasioned unto the Empress the loss of her chessboard, which she would
not have lost for all her empire.  And the way in which thou mayest
recover the chessboard is, to repair to the Castle of Ysbidinongyl, where
is a black man, who lays waste the dominions of the Empress; and if thou
canst slay him, thou wilt recover the chessboard.  But if thou goest
there, thou wilt not return alive.”  “Wilt thou direct me thither?” said
Peredur.  “I will show thee the way,” she replied.  So he went to the
Castle of Ysbidinongyl, and he fought with the black man.  And the black
man besought mercy of Peredur.  “Mercy will I grant thee,” said he, “on
condition that thou cause the chessboard to be restored to the place
where it was when I entered the hall.”  Then the maiden came to him, and
said, “The malediction of Heaven attend thee for thy work, since thou
hast left that monster alive, who lays waste all the possessions of the
Empress.”  “I granted him his life,” said Peredur, “that he might cause
the chessboard to be restored.”  “The chessboard is not in the place
where thou didst find it; go back, therefore, and slay him,” answered
she.  So Peredur went back, and slew the black man.  And when he returned
to the palace, he found the black maiden there.  “Ah! maiden,” said
Peredur, “where is the Empress?”  “I declare to Heaven that thou wilt not
see her now, unless thou dost slay the monster that is in yonder forest.”
“What monster is there?”  “It is a stag that is as swift as the swiftest
bird; and he has one horn in his forehead, as long as the shaft of a
spear, and as sharp as whatever is sharpest.  And he destroys the
branches of the best trees in the forest, and he kills every animal that
he meets with therein; and those that he doth not slay perish of hunger.
And what is worse than that, he comes every night, and drinks up the
fish-pond, and leaves the fishes exposed, so that for the most part they
die before the water returns again.”  “Maiden,” said Peredur, “wilt thou
come and show me this animal?”  “Not so,” said the maiden, “for he has
not permitted any mortal to enter the forest for above a twelvemonth.
Behold, here is a little dog belonging to the Empress, which will rouse
the stag, and will chase him towards thee, and the stag will attack
thee.”  Then the little dog went as a guide to Peredur, and roused the
stag, and brought him towards the place where Peredur was.  And the stag
attacked Peredur, and he let him pass by him, and as he did so, he smote
off his head with his sword.  And while he was looking at the head of the
stag, he saw a lady on horseback coming towards him.  And she took the
little dog in the lappet of her cap, and the head and the body of the
stag lay before her.  And around the stag’s neck was a golden collar.
“Ha! chieftain,” said she, “uncourteously hast thou acted in slaying the
fairest jewel that was in my dominions.”  “I was entreated so to do; and
is there any way by which I can obtain thy friendship?”  “There is,” she
replied.  “Go thou forward unto yonder mountain, and there thou wilt find
a grove; and in the grove there is a cromlech; do thou there challenge a
man three times to fight, and thou shalt have my friendship.”

So Peredur proceeded onward, and came to the side of the grove, and
challenged any man to fight.  And a black man arose from beneath the
cromlech, mounted upon a bony horse, and both he and his horse were clad
in huge rusty armour.  And they fought.  And as often as Peredur cast the
black man to the earth, he would jump again into his saddle.  And Peredur
dismounted, and drew his sword; and thereupon the black man disappeared
with Peredur’s horse and his own, so that he could not gain sight of him
a second time.  And Peredur went along the mountain, and on the other
side of the mountain he beheld a castle in the valley, wherein was a
river.  And he went to the castle; and as he entered it, he saw a hall,
and the door of the hall was open, and he went in.  And there he saw a
lame grey-headed man sitting on one side of the hall, with Gwalchmai
beside him.  And Peredur beheld his horse, which the black man had taken,
in the same stall with that of Gwalchmai.  And they were glad concerning
Peredur.  And he went and seated himself on the other side of the
hoary-headed man.  Then, behold a yellow-haired youth came, and bent upon
the knee before Peredur, and besought his friendship.  “Lord,” said the
youth, “it was I that came in the form of the black maiden to Arthur’s
Court, and when thou didst throw down the chessboard, and when thou didst
slay the black man of Ysbidinongyl, and when thou didst slay the stag,
and when thou didst go to fight the black man of the cromlech.  And I
came with the bloody head in the salver, and with the lance that streamed
with blood from the point to the hand, all along the shaft; and the head
was thy cousin’s, and he was killed by the sorceresses of Gloucester, who
also lamed thine uncle; and I am thy cousin.  And there is a prediction
that thou art to avenge these things.”  Then Peredur and Gwalchmai took
counsel, and sent to Arthur and his household, to beseech them to come
against the sorceresses.  And they began to fight with them; and one of
the sorceresses slew one of Arthur’s men before Peredur’s face, and
Peredur bade her forbear.  And the sorceress slew a man before Peredur’s
face a second time, and a second time he forbad her.  And the third time
the sorceress slew a man before the face of Peredur; and then Peredur
drew his sword, and smote the sorceress on the helmet; and all her
head-armour was split in two parts.  And she set up a cry, and desired
the other sorceresses to flee, and told them that this was Peredur, the
man who had learnt Chivalry with them, and by whom they were destined to
be slain.  Then Arthur and his household fell upon the sorceresses, and
slew the sorceresses of Gloucester every one.  And thus is it related
concerning the Castle of Wonders.




GERAINT THE SON OF ERBIN


ARTHUR was accustomed to hold his Court at Caerlleon upon Usk.  And there
he held it seven Easters and five Christmases.  And once upon a time he
held his Court there at Whitsuntide.  For Caerlleon was the place most
easy of access in his dominions, both by sea and by land.  And there were
assembled nine crowned kings, who were his tributaries, and likewise
earls and barons.  For they were his invited guests at all the high
festivals, unless they were prevented by any great hindrance.  And when
he was at Caerlleon, holding his Court, thirteen churches were set apart
for mass.  And thus were they appointed: one church for Arthur, and his
kings, and his guests; and the second for Gwenhwyvar and her ladies; and
the third for the Steward of the Household and the suitors; and the
fourth for the Franks and the other officers; and the other nine churches
were for the nine Masters of the Household and chiefly for Cwalchmai; for
he, from the eminence of his warlike fame, and from the nobleness of his
birth, was the most exalted of the nine.  And there was no other
arrangement respecting the churches than that which we have mentioned
above.

Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr was the chief porter; but he did not himself perform
the office, except at one of the three high festivals, for he had seven
men to serve him, and they divided the year amongst them.  They were
Grynn, and Pen Pighon, and Llaes Cymyn, and Gogyfwlch, and Gwrdnei with
cat’s eyes, who could see as well by night as by day, and Drem the son of
Dremhitid, and Clust the son of Clustveinyd; and these were Arthur’s
guards.  And on Whit-Tuesday, as the King sat at the banquet, lo! there
entered a tall, fair-headed youth, clad in a coat and a surcoat of
diapered satin, and a golden-hilted sword about his neck, and low shoes
of leather upon his feet.  And he came, and stood before Arthur.  “Hail
to thee, Lord!” said he.  “Heaven prosper thee,” he answered, “and be
thou welcome.  Dost thou bring any new tidings?”  “I do, Lord,” he said.
“I know thee not,” said Arthur.  “It is a marvel to me that thou dost not
know me.  I am one of thy foresters, Lord, in the Forest of Dean, and my
name is Madawc, the son of Twrgadarn.”  “Tell me thine errand,” said
Arthur.  “I will do so, Lord,” said he.  “In the Forest I saw a stag, the
like of which beheld I never yet.”  “What is there about him,” asked
Arthur, “that thou never yet didst see his like?”  “He is of pure white,
Lord, and he does not herd with any other animal through stateliness and
pride, so royal is his bearing.  And I come to seek thy counsel, Lord,
and to know thy will concerning him.”  “It seems best to me,” said
Arthur, “to go and hunt him to-morrow at break of day; and to cause
general notice thereof to be given to-night in all quarters of the
Court.”  And Arryfuerys was Arthur’s chief huntsman, and Arelivri was his
chief page.  And all received notice; and thus it was arranged.  And they
sent the youth before them.  Then Gwenhwyvar said to Arthur, “Wilt thou
permit me, Lord,” said she, “to go to-morrow to see and hear the hunt of
the stag of which the young man spoke?”  “I will gladly,” said Arthur.
“Then will I go,” said she.  And Gwalchmai said to Arthur, “Lord, if it
seem well to thee, permit that into whose hunt soever the stag shall
come, that one, be he a knight, or one on foot, may cut off his head, and
give it to whom he pleases, whether to his own lady-love, or to the lady
of his friend.”  “I grant it gladly,” said Arthur, “and let the Steward
of the Household be chastised, if all are not ready to-morrow for the
chase.”

And they passed the night with songs, and diversions, and discourse, and
ample entertainment.  And when it was time for them all to go to sleep,
they went.  And when the next day came, they arose; and Arthur called the
attendants, who guarded his couch.  And these were four pages, whose
names were Cadyrnerth the son of Porthawr Gandwy, and Ambreu the son of
Bedwor, and Amhar the son of Arthur, and Goreu the son of Custennin.  And
these men came to Arthur and saluted him, and arrayed him in his
garments.  And Arthur wondered that Gwenhwyvar did not awake, and did not
move in her bed; and the attendants wished to awaken her.  “Disturb her
not,” said Arthur, “for she had rather sleep than go to see the hunting.”

Then Arthur went forth, and he heard two horns sounding, one from near
the lodging of the chief huntsman, and the other from near that of the
chief page.  And the whole assembly of the multitudes came to Arthur, and
they took the road to the Forest.

And after Arthur had gone forth from the palace, Gwenhwyvar awoke, and
called to her maidens, and apparelled herself.  “Maidens,” said she, “I
had leave last night to go and see the hunt.  Go one of you to the
stable, and order hither a horse such as a woman may ride.”  And one of
them went, and she found but two horses in the stable, and Gwenhwyvar and
one of her maidens mounted them, and went through the Usk, and followed
the track of the men and the horses.  And as they rode thus, they heard a
loud and rushing sound; and they looked behind them, and beheld a knight
upon a hunter foal of mighty size; and the rider was a fair-haired youth,
bare-legged, and of princely mien, and a golden-hilted sword was at his
side, and a robe and a surcoat of satin were upon him, and two low shoes
of leather upon his feet; and around him was a scarf of blue purple, at
each corner of which was a golden apple.  And his horse stepped stately,
and swift, and proud; and he overtook Gwenhwyvar, and saluted her.
“Heaven prosper thee, Geraint,” said she, “I knew thee when first I saw
thee just now.  And the welcome of Heaven be unto thee.  And why didst
thou not go with thy lord to hunt?”  “Because I knew not when he went,”
said he.  “I marvel, too,” said she, “how he could go unknown to me.”
“Indeed, lady,” said he.  “I was asleep, and knew not when he went; but
thou, O young man, art the most agreeable companion I could have in the
whole kingdom; and it may be, that I shall be more amused with the
hunting than they; for we shall hear the horns when they sound, and we
shall hear the dogs when they are let loose, and begin to cry.”  So they
went to the edge of the Forest, and there they stood.  “From this place,”
said she, “we shall hear when the dogs are let loose.”  And thereupon,
they heard a loud noise, and they looked towards the spot whence it came,
and they beheld a dwarf riding upon a horse, stately, and foaming, and
prancing, and strong, and spirited.  And in the hand of the dwarf was a
whip.  And near the dwarf they saw a lady upon a beautiful white horse,
of steady and stately pace; and she was clothed in a garment of gold
brocade.  And near her was a knight upon a warhorse of large size, with
heavy and bright armour both upon himself and upon his horse.  And truly
they never before saw a knight, or a horse, or armour, of such remarkable
size.  And they were all near to each other.

“Geraint,” said Gwenhwyvar, “knowest thou the name of that tall knight
yonder?”  “I know him not,” said he, “and the strange armour that he
wears prevents my either seeing his face or his features.”  “Go, maiden,”
said Gwenhwyvar, “and ask the dwarf who that knight is.”  Then the maiden
went up to the dwarf; and the dwarf waited for the maiden, when he saw
her coming towards him.  And the maiden inquired of the dwarf who the
knight was.  “I will not tell thee,” he answered.  “Since thou art so
churlish as not to tell me,” said she, “I will ask him himself.”  “Thou
shalt not ask him, by my faith,” said he.  “Wherefore?” said she.
“Because thou art not of honour sufficient to befit thee to speak to my
Lord.”  Then the maiden turned her horse’s head towards the knight, upon
which the dwarf struck her with the whip that was in his hand across the
face and the eyes, until the blood flowed forth.  And the maiden, through
the hurt she received from the blow, returned to Gwenhwyvar, complaining
of the pain.  “Very rudely has the dwarf treated thee,” said Geraint.  “I
will go myself to know who the knight is.”  “Go,” said Gwenhwyvar.  And
Geraint went up to the dwarf.  “Who is yonder knight?” said Geraint.  “I
will not tell thee,” said the dwarf.  “Then will I ask him himself,” said
he.  “That wilt thou not, by my faith,” said the dwarf, “thou art not
honourable enough to speak with my Lord.”  Said Geraint, “I have spoken
with men of equal rank with him.”  And he turned his horse’s head towards
the knight; but the dwarf overtook him, and struck him as he had done the
maiden, so that the blood coloured the scarf that Geraint wore.  Then
Geraint put his hand upon the hilt of his sword, but he took counsel with
himself, and considered that it would be no vengeance for him to slay the
dwarf, and to be attacked unarmed by the armed knight, so he returned to
where Gwenhwyvar was.

“Thou hast acted wisely and discreetly,” said she.  “Lady,” said he, “I
will follow him yet, with thy permission; and at last he will come to
some inhabited place, where I may have arms either as a loan or for a
pledge, so that I may encounter the knight.”  “Go,” said she, “and do not
attack him until thou hast good arms, and I shall be very anxious
concerning thee, until I hear tidings of thee.”  “If I am alive,” said
he, “thou shalt hear tidings of me by to-morrow afternoon;” and with that
he departed.

And the road they took was below the palace of Caerlleon, and across the
ford of the Usk; and they went along a fair, and even, and lofty ridge of
ground, until they came to a town, and at the extremity of the town they
saw a Fortress and a Castle.  And they came to the extremity of the town.
And as the knight passed through it, all the people arose, and saluted
him, and bade him welcome.  And when Geraint came into the town, he
looked at every house, to see if he knew any of those whom he saw.  But
he knew none, and none knew him to do him the kindness to let him have
arms either as a loan or for a pledge.  And every house he saw was full
of men, and arms, and horses.  And they were polishing shields, and
burnishing swords, and washing armour, and shoeing horses.  And the
knight, and the lady, and the dwarf rode up to the Castle that was in the
town, and every one was glad in the Castle.  And from the battlements and
the gates they risked their necks, through their eagerness to greet them,
and to show their joy.

Geraint stood there to see whether the knight would remain in the Castle;
and when he was certain that he would do so, he looked around him; and at
a little distance from the town he saw an old palace in ruins, wherein
was a hall that was falling to decay.  And as he knew not any one in the
town, he went towards the old palace; and when he came near to the
palace, he saw but one chamber, and a bridge of marble-stone leading to
it.  And upon the bridge he saw sitting a hoary-headed man, upon whom
were tattered garments.  And Geraint gazed steadfastly upon him for a
long time.  Then the hoary-headed man spoke to him.  “Young man,” he
said, “wherefore art thou thoughtful?”  “I am thoughtful,” said he,
“because I know not where to go to-night.”  “Wilt thou come forward this
way, chieftain?” said he, “and thou shalt have of the best that can be
procured for thee.”  So Geraint went forward.  And the hoary-headed man
preceded him into the hall.  And in the hall he dismounted, and he left
there his horse.  Then he went on to the upper chamber with the
hoary-headed man.  And in the chamber he beheld an old decrepit woman,
sitting on a cushion, with old, tattered garments of satin upon her; and
it seemed to him that he had never seen a woman fairer than she must have
been, when in the fulness of youth.  And beside her was a maiden, upon
whom were a vest and a veil, that were old, and beginning to be worn out.
And truly, he never saw a maiden more full of comeliness, and grace, and
beauty than she.  And the hoary-headed man said to the maiden, “There is
no attendant for the horse of this youth but thyself.”  “I will render
the best service I am able,” said she, “both to him and to his horse.”
And the maiden disarrayed the youth, and then she furnished his horse
with straw and with corn.  And she went to the hall as before, and then
she returned to the chamber.  And the hoary-headed man said to the
maiden, “Go to the town,” said he, “and bring hither the best that thou
canst find both of food and of liquor.”  “I will, gladly, Lord,” said
she.  And to the town went the maiden.  And they conversed together while
the maiden was at the town.  And, behold! the maiden came back, and a
youth with her, bearing on his back a costrel full of good purchased
mead, and a quarter of a young bullock.  And in the hands of the maiden
was a quantity of white bread, and she had some manchet bread in her
veil, and she came into the chamber.  “I could not obtain better than
this,” said she, “nor with better should I have been trusted.”  “It is
good enough,” said Geraint.  And they caused the meat to be boiled; and
when their food was ready, they sat down.  And it was on this wise;
Geraint sat between the hoary-headed man and his wife, and the maiden
served them.  And they ate and drank.

And when they had finished eating, Geraint talked with the hoary-headed
man, and he asked him in the first place, to whom belonged the palace
that he was in.  “Truly,” said he, “it was I that built it, and to me
also belonged the city and the castle which thou sawest.”  “Alas!” said
Geraint, “how is it that thou hast lost them now?”  “I lost a great
Earldom as well as these,” said he; “and this is how I lost them.  I had
a nephew, the son of my brother, and I took his possessions to myself;
and when he came to his strength, he demanded of me his property, but I
withheld it from him.  So he made war upon me, and wrested from me all
that I possessed.”  “Good Sir,” said Geraint, “wilt thou tell me
wherefore came the knight, and the lady, and the dwarf, just now into the
town, and what is the preparation which I saw, and the putting of arms in
order?”  “I will do so,” said he.  “The preparations are for the game
that is to be held to-morrow by the young Earl, which will be on this
wise.  In the midst of a meadow which is here, two forks will be set up,
and upon the two forks a silver rod, and upon the silver rod a
Sparrow-Hawk, and for the Sparrow-Hawk there will be a tournament.  And
to the tournament will go all the array thou didst see in the city, of
men, and of horses, and of arms.  And with each man will go the lady he
loves best; and no man can joust for the Sparrow-Hawk, except the lady he
loves best be with him.  And the knight that thou sawest has gained the
Sparrow-Hawk these two years; and if he gains it the third year, they
will, from that time, send it every year to him, and he himself will come
here no more.  And he will be called the Knight of the Sparrow-Hawk from
that time forth.”  “Sir,” said Geraint, “what is thy counsel to me
concerning this knight, on account of the insult which I received from
the dwarf, and that which was received by the maiden of Gwenhwyvar, the
wife of Arthur?”  And Geraint told the hoary-headed man what the insult
was that he had received.  “It is not easy to counsel thee, inasmuch as
thou hast neither dame nor maiden belonging to thee, for whom thou canst
joust.  Yet, I have arms here, which thou couldest have; and there is my
horse also, if he seem to thee better than thine own.”  “Ah!  Sir,” said
he, “Heaven reward thee.  But my own horse, to which I am accustomed,
together with thy arms, will suffice me.  And if, when the appointed time
shall come to-morrow, thou wilt permit me, Sir, to challenge for yonder
maiden that is thy daughter, I will engage, if I escape from the
tournament, to love the maiden as long as I live; and if I do not escape,
she will remain unsullied as before.”  “Gladly will I permit thee,” said
the hoary-headed man, “and since thou dost thus resolve, it is necessary
that thy horse and arms should be ready to-morrow at break of day.  For
then the Knight of the Sparrow-Hawk will make proclamation, and ask the
lady he loves best to take the Sparrow-Hawk.  ‘For,’ will he say to her,
‘thou art the fairest of women, and thou didst possess it last year, and
the year previous; and if any deny it thee to-day, by force will I defend
it for thee.’  And therefore,” said the hoary-headed man, “it is needful
for thee to be there at daybreak; and we three will be with thee.”  And
thus was it settled.

And at night, lo! they went to sleep; and before the dawn they arose, and
arrayed themselves; and by the time that it was day, they were all four
in the meadow.  And there was the Knight of the Sparrow-Hawk making the
proclamation, and asking his lady-love to fetch the Sparrow-Hawk.  “Fetch
it not,” said Geraint, “for there is here a maiden, who is fairer, and
more noble, and more comely, and who has a better claim to it than thou.”
“If thou maintainest the Sparrow-Hawk to be due to her, come forward, and
do battle with me.”  And Geraint went forward to the top of the meadow,
having upon himself and upon his horse armour which was heavy, and rusty,
and worthless, and of uncouth shape.  Then they encountered each other,
and they broke a set of lances, and they broke a second set, and a third.
And thus they did at every onset, and they broke as many lances as were
brought to them.  And when the Earl and his company saw the Knight of the
Sparrow-Hawk gaining the mastery, there was shouting, and joy, and mirth
amongst them.  And the hoary-headed man, and his wife, and his daughter
were sorrowful.  And the hoary-headed man served Geraint lances as often
as he broke them, and the dwarf served the Knight of the Sparrow-Hawk.
Then the hoary-headed man came to Geraint.  “Oh! chieftain,” said he,
“since no other will hold with thee, behold, here is the lance which was
in my hand on the day when I received the honour of knighthood; and from
that time to this I never broke it.  And it has an excellent point.”
Then Geraint took the lance, thanking the hoary-headed man.  And
thereupon the dwarf also brought a lance to his lord.  “Behold, here is a
lance for thee, not less good than his,” said the dwarf.  “And bethink
thee, that no knight ever withstood thee before so long as this one has
done.”  “I declare to Heaven,” said Geraint, “that unless death takes me
quickly hence, he shall fare never the better for thy service.”  And
Geraint pricked his horse towards him from afar, and warning him, he
rushed upon him, and gave him a blow so severe, and furious, and fierce,
upon the face of his shield, that he cleft it in two, and broke his
armour, and burst his girths, so that both he and his saddle were borne
to the ground over the horse’s crupper.  And Geraint dismounted quickly.
And he was wroth, and he drew his sword, and rushed fiercely upon him.
Then the knight also arose, and drew his sword against Geraint.  And they
fought on foot with their swords until their arms struck sparks of fire
like stars from one another; and thus they continued fighting until the
blood and sweat obscured the light from their eyes.  And when Geraint
prevailed, the hoary-headed man, and his wife, and his daughter were
glad; and when the knight prevailed, it rejoiced the Earl and his party.
Then the hoary-headed man saw Geraint receive a severe stroke, and he
went up to him quickly, and said to him, “Oh, chieftain, remember the
treatment which thou hadst from the dwarf; and wilt thou not seek
vengeance for the insult to thyself, and for the insult to Gwenhwyvar the
wife of Arthur!”  And Geraint was roused by what he said to him, and he
called to him all his strength, and lifted up his sword, and struck the
knight upon the crown of his head, so that he broke all his head-armour,
and cut through all the flesh and the skin, even to the skull, until he
wounded the bone.

Then the knight fell upon his knees, and cast his sword from his hand,
and besought mercy of Geraint.  “Of a truth,” said he, “I relinquish my
overdaring and my pride in craving thy mercy; and unless I have time to
commit myself to Heaven for my sins, and to talk with a priest, thy mercy
will avail me little.”  “I will grant thee grace upon this condition,”
said Geraint, “that thou wilt go to Gwenhwyvar the wife of Arthur, to do
her satisfaction for the insult which her maiden received from thy dwarf.
As to myself, for the insult which I received from thee and thy dwarf, I
am content with that which I have done unto thee.  Dismount not from the
time thou goest hence until thou comest into the presence of Gwenhwyvar,
to make her what atonement shall be adjudged at the Court of Arthur.”
“This will I do gladly.  And who art thou?” said he.  “I am Geraint the
son of Erbin.  And declare thou also who thou art.”  “I am Edeyrn the son
of Nudd.”  Then he threw himself upon his horse, and went forward to
Arthur’s Court, and the lady he loved best went before him and the dwarf,
with much lamentation.  And thus far this story up to that time.

                                * * * * *

Then came the little Earl and his hosts to Geraint, and saluted him, and
bade him to his castle.  “I may not go,” said Geraint, “but where I was
last night, there will I be to-night also.”  “Since thou wilt none of my
inviting, thou shalt have abundance of all that I can command for thee,
in the place thou wast last night.  And I will order ointment for thee,
to recover thee from thy fatigues, and from the weariness that is upon
thee.”  “Heaven reward thee,” said Geraint, “and I will go to my
lodging.”  And thus went Geraint, and Earl Ynywl, and his wife, and his
daughter.  And when they reached the chamber, the household servants and
attendants of the young Earl had arrived at the Court, and they arranged
all the houses, dressing them with straw and with fire; and in a short
time the ointment was ready, and Geraint came there, and they washed his
head.  Then came the young Earl, with forty honourable knights from among
his attendants, and those who were bidden to the tournament.  And Geraint
came from the anointing.  And the Earl asked him to go to the hall to
eat.  “Where is the Earl Ynywl,” said Geraint, “and his wife, and his
daughter?”  “They are in the chamber yonder,” said the Earl’s
chamberlain, “arraying themselves in garments which the Earl has caused
to be brought for them.”  “Let not the damsel array herself,” said he,
“except in her vest and her veil, until she come to the Court of Arthur,
to be clad by Gwenhwyvar in such garments as she may choose.”  So the
maiden did not array herself.

Then they all entered the hall, and they washed, and went, and sat down
to meat.  And thus were they seated.  On one side of Geraint sat the
young Earl, and Earl Ynywl beyond him; and on the other side of Geraint
were the maiden and her mother.  And after these all sat according to
their precedence in honour.  And they ate.  And they were served
abundantly, and they received a profusion of divers kind of gifts.  Then
they conversed together.  And the young Earl invited Geraint to visit him
next day.  “I will not, by Heaven,” said Geraint.  “To the Court of
Arthur will I go with this maiden to-morrow.  And it is enough for me, as
long as Earl Ynywl is in poverty and trouble; and I go chiefly to seek to
add to his maintenance.”  “Ah, chieftain,” said the young Earl, “it is
not by my fault that Earl Ynywl is without his possessions.”  “By my
faith,” said Geraint, “he shall not remain without them, unless death
quickly takes me hence.”  “Oh, chieftain,” said he, “with regard to the
disagreement between me and Ynywl, I will gladly abide by thy counsel,
and agree to what thou mayest judge right between us.”  “I but ask thee,”
said Geraint, “to restore to him what is his, and what he should have
received from the time he lost his possessions, even until this day.”
“That I will do gladly, for thee,” answered he.  “Then,” said Geraint,
“whosoever is here who owes homage to Ynywl, let him come forward, and
perform it on the spot.”  And all the men did so.  And by that treaty
they abided.  And his castle, and his town, and all his possessions were
restored to Ynywl.  And he received back all that he had lost, even to
the smallest jewel.

Then spoke Earl Ynywl to Geraint.  “Chieftain,” said he, “behold the
maiden for whom thou didst challenge at the tournament, I bestow her upon
thee.”  “She shall go with me,” said Geraint, “to the Court of Arthur;
and Arthur and Gwenhwyvar they shall dispose of her as they will.”  And
the next day they proceeded to Arthur’s Court.  So far concerning
Geraint.

                                * * * * *

Now, this is how Arthur hunted the stag.  The men and the dogs were
divided into hunting parties, and the dogs were let loose upon the stag.
And the last dog that was let loose was the favourite dog of Arthur.
Cavall was his name.  And he left all the other dogs behind him, and
turned the stag.  And at the second turn, the stag came towards the
hunting party of Arthur.  And Arthur set upon him.  And before he could
be slain by any other, Arthur cut off his head.  Then they sounded the
death horn for slaying, and they all gathered round.

Then came Kadyrieith to Arthur, and spoke to him.  “Lord,” said he,
“behold, yonder is Gwenhwyvar, and none with her save only one maiden.”
“Command Gildas the son of Caw, and all the scholars of the Court,” said
Arthur, “to attend Gwenhwyvar to the palace.”  And they did so.

Then they all set forth, holding converse together concerning the head of
the stag, to whom it should be given.  One wished that it should be given
to the lady best beloved by him, and another to the lady whom he loved
best.  And all they of the household, and the knights, disputed sharply
concerning the head.  And with that they came to the palace.  And when
Arthur and Gwenhwyvar heard them disputing about the head of the stag,
Gwenhwyvar said to Arthur, “My lord, this is my counsel concerning the
stag’s head; let it not be given away until Geraint the son of Erbin
shall return from the errand he is upon.”  And Gwenhwyvar told Arthur
what that errand was.  “Right gladly shall it be so,” said Arthur.  And
thus it was settled.  And the next day Gwenhwyvar caused a watch to be
set upon the ramparts for Geraint’s coming.  And after mid-day they
beheld an unshapely little man upon a horse, and after him, as they
supposed, a dame or a damsel, also on horseback, and after her a knight
of large stature, bowed down, and hanging his head low and sorrowfully,
and clad in broken and worthless armour.

And before they came near to the gate, one of the watch went to
Gwenhwyvar, and told her what kind of people they saw, and what aspect
they bore.  “I know not who they are,” said he.  “But I know,” said
Gwenhwyvar; “this is the knight whom Geraint pursued, and methinks that
he comes not here by his own free will.  But Geraint has overtaken him,
and avenged the insult to the maiden to the uttermost.”  And thereupon,
behold a porter came to the spot where Gwenhwyvar was.  “Lady,” said he,
“at the gate there is a knight, and I saw never a man of so pitiful an
aspect to look upon as he.  Miserable and broken is the armour that he
wears, and the hue of blood is more conspicuous upon it than its own
colour.”  “Knowest thou his name?” said she.  “I do,” said he; “he tells
me that he is Edeyrn the son of Nudd.”  Then she replied, “I know him
not.”

So Gwenhwyvar went to the gate to meet him, and he entered.  And
Gwenhwyvar was sorry when she saw the condition he was in, even though he
was accompanied by the churlish dwarf.  Then Edeyrn saluted Gwenhwyvar.
“Heaven protect thee,” said she.  “Lady,” said he, “Geraint the son of
Erbin, thy best and most valiant servant, greets thee.”  “Did he meet
thee?” she asked.  “Yes,” said he, “and it was not to my advantage; and
that was not his fault, but mine, Lady.  And Geraint greets thee well;
and in greeting thee he compelled me to come hither to do thy pleasure
for the insult which thy maiden received from the dwarf.  He forgives the
insult to himself, in consideration of his having put me in peril of my
life.  And he imposed on me a condition, manly, and honourable, and
warrior-like, which was to do thee justice, Lady.”  “Now, where did he
overtake thee?”  “At the place where we were jousting, and contending for
the Sparrow-Hawk, in the town which is now called Cardiff.  And there
were none with him save three persons, of a mean and tattered condition.
And these were an aged, hoary-headed man, and a woman advanced in years,
and a fair young maiden, clad in worn-out garments.  And it was for the
avouchment of the love of that maiden that Geraint jousted for the
Sparrow-Hawk at the tournament, for he said that that maiden was better
entitled to the Sparrow-Hawk than this maiden who was with me.  And
thereupon we encountered each other, and he left me, Lady, as thou
seest.”  “Sir,” said she, “when thinkest thou that Geraint will be here?”
“To-morrow, Lady, I think he will be here with the maiden.”

Then Arthur came to him, and he saluted Arthur; and Arthur gazed a long
time upon him, and was amazed to see him thus.  And thinking that he knew
him, he inquired of him, “Art thou Edeyrn the son of Nudd?”  “I am,
Lord,” said he, “and I have met with much trouble, and received wounds
unsupportable.”  Then he told Arthur all his adventure.  “Well,” said
Arthur, “from what I hear, it behoves Gwenhwyvar to be merciful towards
thee.”  “The mercy which thou desirest, Lord,” said she, “will I grant to
him, since it is as insulting to thee that an insult should be offered to
me as to thyself.”  “Thus will it be best to do,” said Arthur; “let this
man have medical care until it be known whether he may live.  And if he
live, he shall do such satisfaction as shall be judged best by the men of
the Court; and take thou sureties to that effect.  And if he die, too
much will be the death of such a youth as Edeyrn for an insult to a
maiden.”  “This pleases me,” said Gwenhwyvar.  And Arthur became surety
for Edeyrn, and Caradawc the son of Llyr, Gwallawg the son of Llenawg,
and Owain the son of Nudd, and Gwalchmai, and many others with them.  And
Arthur caused Morgan Tud to be called to him.  He was the chief
physician.  “Take with thee Edeyrn the son of Nudd, and cause a chamber
to be prepared for him, and let him have the aid of medicine as thou
wouldst do unto myself, if I were wounded, and let none into his chamber
to molest him, but thyself and thy disciples, to administer to him
remedies.”  “I will do so gladly, Lord,” said Morgan Tud.  Then said the
steward of the household, “Whither is it right, Lord, to order the
maiden?”  “To Gwenhwyvar and her handmaidens,” said he.  And the steward
of the household so ordered her.  Thus far concerning them.

                                * * * * *

The next day came Geraint towards the Court; and there was a watch set on
the ramparts by Gwenhwyvar, lest he should arrive unawares.  And one of
the watch came to the place where Gwenhwyvar was.  “Lady,” said he,
“methinks that I see Geraint, and the maiden with him.  He is on
horseback, but he has his walking gear upon him, and the maiden appears
to be in white, seeming to be clad in a garment of linen.”  “Assemble all
the women,” said Gwenhwyvar, “and come to meet Geraint, to welcome him,
and wish him joy.”  And Gwenhwyvar went to meet Geraint and the maiden.
And when Geraint came to the place where Gwenhwyvar was, he saluted her.
“Heaven prosper thee,” said she, “and welcome to thee.  And thy career
has been successful, and fortunate, and resistless, and glorious.  And
Heaven reward thee, that thou hast so proudly caused me to have
retribution.”  “Lady,” said he, “I earnestly desired to obtain thee
satisfaction according to thy will; and, behold, here is the maiden
through whom thou hadst thy revenge.”  “Verily,” said Gwenhwyvar, “the
welcome of Heaven be unto her; and it is fitting that we should receive
her joyfully.”  Then they went in, and dismounted.  And Geraint came to
where Arthur was, and saluted him.  “Heaven protect thee,” said Arthur,
“and the welcome of Heaven be unto thee.  And since Edeyrn the son of
Nudd has received his overthrow and wounds from thy hands, thou hast had
a prosperous career.”  “Not upon me be the blame,” said Geraint, “it was
through the arrogance of Edeyrn the son of Nudd himself that we were not
friends.  I would not quit him until I knew who he was, and until the one
had vanquished the other.”  “Now,” said Arthur, “where is the maiden for
whom I heard thou didst give challenge?”  “She is gone with Gwenhwyvar to
her chamber.”

Then went Arthur to see the maiden.  And Arthur, and all his companions,
and his whole Court, were glad concerning the maiden.  And certain were
they all, that had her array been suitable to her beauty, they had never
seen a maid fairer than she.  And Arthur gave away the maiden to Geraint.
And the usual bond made between two persons was made between Geraint and
the maiden, and the choicest of all Gwenhwyvar’s apparel was given to the
maiden; and thus arrayed, she appeared comely and graceful to all who
beheld her.  And that day and that night were spent in abundance of
minstrelsy, and ample gifts of liquor, and a multitude of games.  And
when it was time for them to go to sleep, they went.  And in the chamber
where the couch of Arthur and Gwenhwyvar was, the couch of Geraint and
Enid was prepared.  And from that time she became his bride.  And the
next day Arthur satisfied all the claimants upon Geraint with bountiful
gifts.  And the maiden took up her abode in the palace; and she had many
companions, both men and women, and there was no maiden more esteemed
than she in the Island of Britain.

Then spake Gwenhwyvar.  “Rightly did I judge,” said she, “concerning the
head of the stag, that it should not be given to any until Geraint’s
return; and, behold, here is a fit occasion for bestowing it.  Let it be
given to Enid the daughter of Ynywl, the most illustrious maiden.  And I
do not believe that any will begrudge it her, for between her and every
one here there exists nothing but love and friendship.”  Much applauded
was this by them all, and by Arthur also.  And the head of the stag was
given to Enid.  And thereupon her fame increased, and her friends
thenceforward became more in number than before.  And Geraint from that
time forth loved the stag, and the tournament, and hard encounters; and
he came victorious from them all.  And a year, and a second, and a third,
he proceeded thus, until his fame had flown over the face of the kingdom.

                                * * * * *

And once upon a time Arthur was holding his Court at Caerlleon upon Usk,
at Whitsuntide.  And, behold, there came to him ambassadors, wise and
prudent, full of knowledge, and eloquent of speech, and they saluted
Arthur.  “Heaven prosper you,” said Arthur, “and the welcome of Heaven be
unto you.  And whence do you come?”  “We come, Lord,” said they, “from
Cornwall; and we are ambassadors from Erbin the son of Custennin, thy
uncle, and our mission is unto thee.  And he greets thee well, as an
uncle should greet his nephew, and as a vassal should greet his lord.
And he represents unto thee that he waxes heavy and feeble, and is
advancing in years.  And the neighbouring chiefs, knowing this, grow
insolent towards him, and covet his land and possessions.  And he
earnestly beseeches thee, Lord, to permit Geraint his son to return to
him, to protect his possessions, and to become acquainted with his
boundaries.  And unto him he represents that it were better for him to
spend the flower of his youth and the prime of his age in preserving his
own boundaries, than in tournaments, which are productive of no profit,
although he obtains glory in them.”

“Well,” said Arthur, “go, and divest yourselves of your accoutrements,
and take food, and refresh yourselves after your fatigues; and before you
go forth hence you shall have an answer.”  And they went to eat.  And
Arthur considered that it would go hard with him to let Geraint depart
from him and from his Court; neither did he think it fair that his cousin
should be restrained from going to protect his dominions and his
boundaries, seeing that his father was unable to do so.  No less was the
grief and regret of Gwenhwyvar, and all her women, and all her damsels,
through fear that the maiden would leave them.  And that day and that
night were spent in abundance of feasting.  And Arthur showed Geraint the
cause of the mission, and of the coming of the ambassadors to him out of
Cornwall.  “Truly,” said Geraint, “be it to my advantage or disadvantage,
Lord, I will do according to thy will concerning this embassy.”
“Behold,” said Arthur, “though it grieves me to part with thee, it is my
counsel that thou go to dwell in thine own dominions, and to defend thy
boundaries, and to take with thee to accompany thee as many as thou wilt
of those thou lovest best among my faithful ones, and among thy friends,
and among thy companions in arms.”  “Heaven reward thee; and this will I
do,” said Geraint.  “What discourse,” said Gwenhwyvar, “do I hear between
you?  Is it of those who are to conduct Geraint to his country?”  “It
is,” said Arthur.  “Then it is needful for me to consider,” said she,
“concerning companions and a provision for the lady that is with me?”
“Thou wilt do well,” said Arthur.

And that night they went to sleep.  And the next day the ambassadors were
permitted to depart, and they were told that Geraint should follow them.
And on the third day Geraint set forth, and many went with him.
Gwalchmai the son of Gwyar, and Riogonedd the son of the king of Ireland,
and Ondyaw the son of the duke of Burgundy, Gwilim the son of the ruler
of the Franks, Howel the son of Emyr of Brittany, Elivry, and Nawkyrd,
Gwynn the son of Tringad, Goreu the son of Custennin, Gweir Gwrhyd Vawr,
Garannaw the son of Golithmer, Peredur the son of Evrawc, Gwynnllogell,
Gwyr a judge in the Court of Arthur, Dyvyr the son of Alun of Dyved,
Gwrei Gwalstawd Ieithoedd, Bedwyr the son of Bedrawd, Hadwry the son of
Gwryon, Kai the son of Kynyr, Odyar the Frank, the Steward of Arthur’s
Court, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd.  Said Geraint, “I think that I shall
have enough of knighthood with me.”  “Yes,” said Arthur, “but it will not
be fitting for thee to take Edeyrn with thee, although he is well, until
peace shall be made between him and Gwenhwyvar.”  “Gwenhwyvar can permit
him to go with me, if he give sureties.”  “If she please, she can let him
go without sureties, for enough of pain and affliction has he suffered
for the insult which the maiden received from the dwarf.”  “Truly,” said
Gwenhwyvar, “since it seems well to thee and to Geraint, I will do this
gladly, Lord.”  Then she permitted Edeyrn freely to depart.  And many
there were who accompanied Geraint, and they set forth; and never was
there seen a fairer host journeying towards the Severn.  And on the other
side of the Severn were the nobles of Erbin the son of Custennin, and his
foster-father at their head, to welcome Geraint with gladness; and many
of the women of the Court, with his mother, came to receive Enid the
daughter of Ynywl, his wife.  And there was great rejoicing and gladness
throughout the whole Court, and throughout all the country, concerning
Geraint, because of the greatness of their love towards him, and of the
greatness of the fame which he had gained since he went from amongst
them, and because he was come to take possession of his dominions and to
preserve his boundaries.  And they came to the Court.  And in the Court
they had ample entertainment, and a multitude of gifts and abundance of
liquor, and a sufficiency of service, and a variety of minstrelsy and of
games.  And to do honour to Geraint, all the chief men of the country
were invited that night to visit him.  And they passed that day and that
night in the utmost enjoyment.  And at dawn next day Erbin arose, and
summoned to him Geraint, and the noble persons who had borne him company.
And he said to Geraint, “I am a feeble and aged man, and whilst I was
able to maintain the dominion for thee and for myself, I did so.  But
thou art young, and in the flower of thy vigour and of thy youth;
henceforth do thou preserve thy possessions.”  “Truly,” said Geraint,
“with my consent thou shalt not give the power over thy dominions at this
time into my hands, and thou shalt not take me from Arthur’s Court.”
“Into thy hands will I give them,” said Erbin, “and this day also shalt
thou receive the homage of thy subjects.”

Then said Gwalchmai, “It were better for thee to satisfy those who have
boons to ask, to-day, and to-morrow thou canst receive the homage of thy
dominions.”  So all that had boons to ask were summoned into one place.
And Kadyrieith came to them, to know what were their requests.  And every
one asked that which he desired.  And the followers of Arthur began to
make gifts, and immediately the men of Cornwall came, and gave also.  And
they were not long in giving, so eager was every one to bestow gifts.
And of those who came to ask gifts, none departed unsatisfied.  And that
day and that night were spent in the utmost enjoyment.

And the next day, at dawn, Erbin desired Geraint to send messengers to
the men, to ask them whether it was displeasing to them that he should
come to receive their homage, and whether they had anything to object to
him.  Then Geraint sent ambassadors to the men of Cornwall, to ask them
this.  And they all said that it would be the fulness of joy and honour
to them for Geraint to come and receive their homage.  So he received the
homage of such as were there.  And they remained with him till the third
night.  And the day after the followers of Arthur intended to go away.
“It is too soon for you to go away yet,” said he, “stay with me until I
have finished receiving the homage of my chief men, who have agreed to
come to me.”  And they remained with him until he had done so.  Then they
set forth towards the Court of Arthur; and Geraint went to bear them
company, and Enid also, as far as Diganhwy: there they parted.  Then
Ondyaw the son of the duke of Burgundy said to Geraint, “Go first of all
and visit the uppermost parts of thy dominions, and see well to the
boundaries of thy territories; and if thou hast any trouble respecting
them, send unto thy companions.”  “Heaven reward thee,” said Geraint,
“and this will I do.”  And Geraint journeyed to the uttermost part of his
dominions.  And experienced guides, and the chief men of his country,
went with him.  And the furthermost point that they showed him he kept
possession of.

And, as he had been used to do when he was at Arthur’s Court, he
frequented tournaments.  And he became acquainted with valiant and mighty
men, until he had gained as much fame there as he had formerly done
elsewhere.  And he enriched his Court, and his companions, and his
nobles, with the best horses and the best arms, and with the best and
most valuable jewels, and he ceased not until his fame had flown over the
face of the whole kingdom.  And when he knew that it was thus, he began
to love ease and pleasure, for there was no one who was worth his
opposing.  And he loved his wife, and liked to continue in the palace,
with minstrelsy and diversions.  And for a long time he abode at home.
And after that he began to shut himself up in the chamber of his wife,
and he took no delight in anything besides, insomuch that he gave up the
friendship of his nobles, together with his hunting and his amusements,
and lost the hearts of all the host in his Court; and there was murmuring
and scoffing concerning him among the inhabitants of the palace, on
account of his relinquishing so completely their companionship for the
love of his wife.  And these tidings came to Erbin.  And when Erbin had
heard these things, he spoke unto Enid, and inquired of her whether it
was she that had caused Geraint to act thus, and to forsake his people
and his hosts.  “Not I, by my confession unto Heaven,” said she, “there
is nothing more hateful to me than this.”  And she knew not what she
should do, for, although it was hard for her to own this to Geraint, yet
was it not more easy for her to listen to what she heard, without warning
Geraint concerning it.  And she was very sorrowful.

And one morning in the summer time, they were upon their couch, and
Geraint lay upon the edge of it.  And Enid was without sleep in the
apartment, which had windows of glass.  And the sun shone upon the couch.
And the clothes had slipped from off his arms and his breast, and he was
asleep.  Then she gazed upon the marvellous beauty of his appearance, and
she said, “Alas, and am I the cause that these arms and this breast have
lost their glory and the warlike fame which they once so richly enjoyed!”
And as she said this, the tears dropped from her eyes, and they fell upon
his breast.  And the tears she shed, and the words she had spoken, awoke
him; and another thing contributed to awaken him, and that was the idea
that it was not in thinking of him that she spoke thus, but that it was
because she loved some other man more than him, and that she wished for
other society, and thereupon Geraint was troubled in his mind, and he
called his squire; and when he came to him, “Go quickly,” said he, “and
prepare my horse and my arms, and make them ready.  And do thou arise,”
said he to Enid, “and apparel thyself; and cause thy horse to be
accoutred, and clothe thee in the worst riding-dress that thou hast in
thy possession.  And evil betide me,” said he, “if thou returnest here
until thou knowest whether I have lost my strength so completely as thou
didst say.  And if it be so, it will then be easy for thee to seek the
society thou didst wish for of him of whom thou wast thinking.”  So she
arose, and clothed herself in her meanest garments.  “I know nothing,
Lord,” said she, “of thy meaning.”  “Neither wilt thou know at this
time,” said he.

Then Geraint went to see Erbin.  “Sir,” said he, “I am going upon a
quest, and I am not certain when I may come back.  Take heed, therefore,
unto thy possessions, until my return.”  “I will do so,” said he, “but it
is strange to me that thou shouldest go so suddenly.  And who will
proceed with thee, since thou art not strong enough to traverse the land
of Lloegyr alone?”  “But one person only will go with me.”  “Heaven
counsel thee, my son,” said Erbin, “and may many attach themselves to
thee in Lloegyr.”  Then went Geraint to the place where his horse was,
and it was equipped with foreign armour, heavy and shining.  And he
desired Enid to mount her horse, and to ride forward, and to keep a long
way before him.  “And whatever thou mayest see, and whatever thou mayest
hear concerning me,” said he, “do thou not turn back.  And unless I speak
unto thee, say not thou one word either.”  And they set forward.  And he
did not choose the pleasantest and most frequented road, but that which
was the wildest and most beset by thieves, and robbers, and venomous
animals.  And they came to a high road, which they followed till they saw
a vast forest, and they went towards it, and they saw four armed horsemen
come forth from the forest.  When the horsemen had beheld them, one of
them said to the others, “Behold, here is a good occasion for us to
capture two horses and armour, and a lady likewise; for this we shall
have no difficulty in doing against yonder single knight, who hangs his
head so pensively and heavily.”  And Enid heard this discourse, and she
knew not what she should do through fear of Geraint, who had told her to
be silent.  “The vengeance of Heaven be upon me,” she said, “if I would
not rather receive my death from his hand than from the hand of any
other; and though he should slay me yet will I speak to him, lest I
should have the misery to witness his death.”  So she waited for Geraint
until he came near to her.  “Lord,” said she, “didst thou hear the words
of those men concerning thee?”  Then he lifted up his eyes, and looked at
her angrily.  “Thou hadst only,” said he, “to hold thy peace as I bade
thee.  I wish but for silence, and not for warning.  And though thou
shouldest desire to see my defeat and my death by the hands of those men,
yet do I feel no dread.”  Then the foremost of them couched his lance,
and rushed upon Geraint.  And he received him, and that not feebly.  But
he let the thrust go by him, while he struck the horseman upon the centre
of his shield in such a manner that his shield was split, and his armour
broken, and so that a cubit’s length of the shaft of Geraint’s lance
passed through his body, and sent him to the earth, the length of the
lance over his horse’s crupper.  Then the second horseman attacked him
furiously, being wroth at the death of his companion.  But with one
thrust Geraint overthrew him also, and killed him as he had done the
other.  Then the third set upon him, and he killed him in like manner.
And thus also he slew the fourth.  Sad and sorrowful was the maiden as
she saw all this.  Geraint dismounted from his horse, and took the arms
of the men he had slain, and placed them upon their saddles, and tied
together the reins of their horses, and he mounted his horse again.
“Behold what thou must do,” said he; “take the four horses, and drive
them before thee, and proceed forward, as I bade thee just now.  And say
not one word unto me, unless I speak first unto thee.  And I declare unto
Heaven,” said he, “if thou doest not thus, it will be to thy cost.”  “I
will do, as far as I can, Lord,” said she, “according to thy desire.”
Then they went forward through the forest; and when they left the forest,
they came to a vast plain, in the centre of which was a group of thickly
tangled copse-wood; and from out thereof they beheld three horsemen
coming towards them, well equipped with armour, both they and their
horses.  Then the maiden looked steadfastly upon them; and when they had
come near, she heard them say one to another, “Behold, here is a good
arrival for us; here are coming for us four horses and four suits of
armour.  We shall easily obtain them spite of yonder dolorous knight, and
the maiden also will fall into our power.”  “This is but too true,” said
she to herself, “for my husband is tired with his former combat.  The
vengeance of Heaven will be upon me, unless I warn him of this.”  So the
maiden waited until Geraint came up to her.  “Lord,” said she, “dust thou
not hear the discourse of yonder men concerning thee?”  “What was it?”
asked he.  “They say to one another, that they will easily obtain all
this spoil.”  “I declare to Heaven,” he answered, “that their words are
less grievous to me than that thou wilt not be silent, and abide by my
counsel.”  “My Lord,” said she, “I feared lest they should surprise thee
unawares.”  “Hold thy peace, then,” said he, “do not I desire silence?”
And thereupon one of the horsemen couched his lance, and attacked
Geraint.  And he made a thrust at him, which he thought would be very
effective; but Geraint received it carelessly, and struck it aside, and
then he rushed upon him, and aimed at the centre of his person, and from
the shock of man and horse, the quantity of his armour did not avail him,
and the head of the lance and part of the shaft passed through him, so
that he was carried to the ground an arm and a spear’s length over the
crupper of his horse.  And both the other horsemen came forward in their
turn, but their onset was not more successful than that of their
companion.  And the maiden stood by, looking at all this; and on the one
hand she was in trouble lest Geraint should be wounded in his encounter
with the men, and on the other hand she was joyful to see him victorious.
Then Geraint dismounted, and bound the three suits of armour upon the
three saddles, and he fastened the reins of all the horses together, so
that he had seven horses with him.  And he mounted his own horse, and
commanded the maiden to drive forward the others.  “It is no more use for
me to speak to thee than to refrain, for thou wilt not attend to my
advice.”  “I will do so, as far as I am able, Lord,” said she; “but I
cannot conceal from thee the fierce and threatening words which I may
hear against thee, Lord, from such strange people as those that haunt
this wilderness.”  “I declare to Heaven,” said he, “that I desire nought
but silence; therefore, hold thy peace.”  “I will, Lord, while I can.”
And the maiden went on with the horses before her, and she pursued her
way straight onwards.  And from the copse-wood already mentioned, they
journeyed over a vast and dreary open plain.  And at a great distance
from them they beheld a wood, and they could see neither end nor boundary
to the wood, except on that side that was nearest to them, and they went
towards it.  Then there came from out the wood five horsemen, eager, and
bold, and mighty, and strong, mounted upon chargers that were powerful,
and large of bone, and high-mettled, and proudly snorting, and both the
men and the horses were well equipped with arms.  And when they drew near
to them, Enid heard them say, “Behold, here is a fine booty coming to us,
which we shall obtain easily and without labour, for we shall have no
trouble in taking all those horses and arms, and the lady also, from
yonder single knight, so doleful and sad.”

Sorely grieved was the maiden upon hearing this discourse, so that she
knew not in the world what she should do.  At last, however, she
determined to warn Geraint; so she turned her horse’s head towards him.
“Lord,” said she, “if thou hadst heard as I did what yonder horsemen said
concerning thee, thy heaviness would be greater than it is.”  Angrily and
bitterly did Geraint smile upon her, and he said, “Thee do I hear doing
everything that I forbade thee; but it may be that thou will repent this
yet.”  And immediately, behold, the men met them, and victoriously and
gallantly did Geraint overcome them all five.  And he placed the five
suits of armour upon the five saddles, and tied together the reins of the
twelve horses, and gave them in charge to Enid.  “I know not,” said he,
“what good it is for me to order thee; but this time I charge thee in an
especial manner.”  So the maiden went forward towards the wood, keeping
in advance of Geraint, as he had desired her; and it grieved him as much
as his wrath would permit, to see a maiden so illustrious as she having
so much trouble with the care of the horses.  Then they reached the wood,
and it was both deep and vast; and in the wood night overtook them.  “Ah,
maiden,” said he, “it is vain to attempt proceeding forward!”  “Well,
Lord,” said she, “whatsoever thou wishest, we will do.”  “It will be best
for us,” he answered, “to turn out of the wood, and to rest, and wait for
the day, in order to pursue our journey.”  “That will we, gladly,” said
she.  And they did so.  Having dismounted himself, he took her down from
her horse.  “I cannot, by any means, refrain from sleep, through
weariness,” said he.  “Do thou, therefore, watch the horses, and sleep
not.”  “I will, Lord,” said she.  Then he went to sleep in his armour,
and thus passed the night, which was not long at that season.  And when
she saw the dawn of day appear, she looked around her, to see if he were
waking, and thereupon he woke.  “My Lord,” she said, “I have desired to
awake thee for some time.”  But he spake nothing to her about fatigue, as
he had desired her to be silent.  Then he arose, and said unto her, “Take
the horses, and ride on; and keep straight on before thee as thou didst
yesterday.”  And early in the day they left the wood, and they came to an
open country, with meadows on one hand, and mowers mowing the meadows.
And there was a river before them, and the horses bent down, and drank
the water.  And they went up out of the river by a lofty steep; and there
they met a slender stripling, with a satchel about his neck, and they saw
that there was something in the satchel, but they knew not what it was.
And he had a small blue pitcher in his hand, and a bowl on the mouth of
the pitcher.  And the youth saluted Geraint.  “Heaven prosper thee,” said
Geraint, “and whence dost thou come?”  “I come,” said he, “from the city
that lies before thee.  My Lord,” he added, “will it be displeasing to
thee if I ask whence thou comest also?”  “By no means—through yonder wood
did I come.”  “Thou camest not through the wood to-day.”  “No,” he
replied, “we were in the wood last night.”  “I warrant,” said the youth,
“that thy condition there last night was not the most pleasant, and that
thou hadst neither meat nor drink.”  “No, by my faith,” said he.  “Wilt
thou follow my counsel,” said the youth, “and take thy meal from me?”
“What sort of meal?” he inquired.  “The breakfast which is sent for
yonder mowers, nothing less than bread and meat and wine; and if thou
wilt, Sir, they shall have none of it.”  “I will,” said he, “and Heaven
reward thee for it.”

So Geraint alighted, and the youth took the maiden from off her horse.
Then they washed, and took their repast.  And the youth cut the bread in
slices, and gave them drink, and served them withal.  And when they had
finished, the youth arose, and said to Geraint, “My Lord, with thy
permission, I will now go and fetch some food for the mowers.”  “Go,
first, to the town,” said Geraint, “and take a lodging for me in the best
place that thou knowest, and the most commodious one for the horses, and
take thou whichever horse and arms thou choosest in payment for thy
service and thy gift.”  “Heaven reward thee, Lord,” said the youth, “and
this would be ample to repay services much greater than those I have
rendered unto thee.”  And to the town went the youth, and he took the
best and the most pleasant lodgings that he knew; and after that he went
to the palace, having the horse and armour with him, and proceeded to the
place where the Earl was, and told him all his adventure.  “I go now,
Lord,” said he, “to meet the young man, and to conduct him to his
lodging.”  “Go, gladly,” said the Earl, “and right joyfully shall he be
received here, if he so come.”  And the youth went to meet Geraint, and
told him that he would be received gladly by the Earl in his own palace;
but he would go only to his lodgings.  And he had a goodly chamber, in
which was plenty of straw, and drapery, and a spacious and commodious
place he had for the horses; and the youth prepared for them plenty of
provender.  And after they had disarrayed themselves, Geraint spoke thus
to Enid: “Go,” said he, “to the other side of the chamber, and come not
to this side of the house; and thou mayest call to thee the woman of the
house, if thou wilt.”  “I will do, Lord,” said she, “as thou sayest.”
And thereupon the man of the house came to Geraint, and welcomed him.
“Oh, chieftain,” he said, “hast thou taken thy meal?”  “I have,” said he.
Then the youth spoke to him, and inquired if he would not drink something
before he met the Earl.  “Truly I will,” said he.  So the youth went into
the town, and brought them drink.  And they drank.  “I must needs sleep,”
said Geraint.  “Well,” said the youth; “and whilst thou sleepest, I will
go to see the Earl.”  “Go, gladly,” he said, “and come here again when I
require thee.”  And Geraint went to sleep; and so did Enid also.

And the youth came to the place where the Earl was, and the Earl asked
him where the lodgings of the knight were, and he told him.  “I must go,”
said the youth, “to wait on him in the evening.”  “Go,” answered the
Earl, “and greet him well from me, and tell him that in the evening I
will go to see him.”  “This will I do,” said the youth.  So he came when
it was time for them to awake.  And they arose, and went forth.  And when
it was time for them to take their food, they took it.  And the youth
served them.  And Geraint inquired of the man of the house, whether there
were any of his companions that he wished to invite to him, and he said
that there were.  “Bring them hither, and entertain them at my cost with
the best thou canst buy in the town.”

And the man of the house brought there those whom he chose, and feasted
them at Geraint’s expense.  Thereupon, behold, the Earl came to visit
Geraint, and his twelve honourable knights with him.  And Geraint rose
up, and welcomed him.  “Heaven preserve thee,” said the Earl.  Then they
all sat down according to their precedence in honour.  And the Earl
conversed with Geraint, and inquired of him the object of his journey.
“I have none,” he replied, “but to seek adventures, and to follow my own
inclination.”  Then the Earl cast his eye upon Enid, and he looked at her
steadfastly.  And he thought he had never seen a maiden fairer or more
comely than she.  And he set all his thoughts and his affections upon
her.  Then he asked of Geraint, “Have I thy permission to go and converse
with yonder maiden, for I see that she is apart from thee?”  “Thou hast
it gladly,” said he.  So the Earl went to the place where the maiden was,
and spake with her.  “Ah, maiden,” said he, “it cannot be pleasant to
thee to journey thus with yonder man!”  “It is not unpleasant to me,”
said she, “to journey the same road that he journeys.”  “Thou hast
neither youths nor maidens to serve thee,” said he.  “Truly,” she
replied, “it is more pleasant for me to follow yonder man, than to be
served by youths and maidens.”  “I will give thee good counsel,” said he.
“All my Earldom will I place in thy possession, if thou wilt dwell with
me.”  “That will I not, by Heaven,” she said; “yonder man was the first
to whom my faith was ever pledged; and shall I prove inconstant to him!”
“Thou art in the wrong,” said the Earl; “if I slay the man yonder, I can
keep thee with me as long as I choose; and when thou no longer pleasest
me I can turn thee away.  But if thou goest with me by thine own good
will, I protest that our union shall continue eternal and undivided as
long as I remain alive.”  Then she pondered these words of his, and she
considered that it was advisable to encourage him in his request.
“Behold, then, chieftain, this is most expedient for thee to do to save
me any needless imputation; come here to-morrow, and take me away as
though I knew nothing thereof.”  “I will do so,” said he.  So he arose,
and took his leave, and went forth with his attendants.  And she told not
then to Geraint any of the conversation which she had had with the Earl,
lest it should rouse his anger, and cause him uneasiness and care.

And at the usual hour they went to sleep.  And at the beginning of the
night Enid slept a little; and at midnight she arose, and placed all
Geraint’s armour together, so that it might be ready to put on.  And
although fearful of her errand, she came to the side of Geraint’s bed;
and she spoke to him softly and gently, saying, “My Lord, arise, and
clothe thyself, for these were the words of the Earl to me, and his
intention concerning me.”  So she told Geraint all that had passed.  And
although he was wroth with her, he took warning, and clothed himself.
And she lighted a candle, that he might have light to do so.  “Leave
there the candle,” said he, “and desire the man of the house to come
here.”  Then she went, and the man of the house came to him.  “Dost thou
know how much I owe thee?” asked Geraint.  “I think thou owest but
little.”  “Take the eleven horses and the eleven suits of armour.”
“Heaven reward thee, lord,” said he, “but I spent not the value of one
suit of armour upon thee.”  “For that reason,” said he, “thou wilt be the
richer.  And now, wilt thou come to guide me out of the town?”  “I will,
gladly,” said he, “and in which direction dost thou intend to go?”  “I
wish to leave the town by a different way from that by which I entered
it.”  So the man of the lodgings accompanied him as far as he desired.
Then he bade the maiden to go on before him; and she did so, and went
straight forward, and his host returned home.  And he had only just
reached his house, when, behold, the greatest tumult approached that was
ever heard.  And when he looked out, he saw fourscore knights in complete
armour around the house, with the Earl Dwnn at their head.  “Where is the
knight that was here?” said the Earl.  “By thy hand,” said he, “he went
hence some time ago.”  “Wherefore, villain,” said he, “didst thou let him
go without informing me?”  “My Lord, thou didst not command me to do so,
else would I not have allowed him to depart.”  “What way dost thou think
that he took?”  “I know not, except that he went along the high road.”
And they turned their horses’ heads that way, and seeing the tracks of
the horses upon the high road, they followed.  And when the maiden beheld
the dawning of the day, she looked behind her, and saw vast clouds of
dust coming nearer and nearer to her.  And thereupon she became uneasy,
and she thought that it was the Earl and his host coming after them.  And
thereupon she beheld a knight appearing through the mist.  “By my faith,”
said she, “though he should slay me, it were better for me to receive my
death at his hands, than to see him killed without warning him.  My
Lord,” she said to him, “seest thou yonder man hastening after thee, and
many others with him?”  “I do see him,” said he; “and in despite of all
my orders, I see that thou wilt never keep silence.”  Then he turned upon
the knight, and with the first thrust he threw him down under his horse’s
feet.  And as long as there remained one of the fourscore knights, he
overthrew every one of them at the first onset.  And from the weakest to
the strongest, they all attacked him one after the other, except the
Earl: and last of all the Earl came against him also.  And he broke his
lance, and then he broke a second.  But Geraint turned upon him, and
struck him with his lance upon the centre of his shield, so that by that
single thrust the shield was split, and all his armour broken, and he
himself was brought over his horse’s crupper to the ground, and was in
peril of his life.  And Geraint drew near to him; and at the noise of the
trampling of his horse the Earl revived.  “Mercy, Lord,” said he to
Geraint.  And Geraint granted him mercy.  But through the hardness of the
ground where they had fallen, and the violence of the stroke which they
had received, there was not a single knight amongst them that escaped
without receiving a fall, mortally severe, and grievously painful, and
desperately wounding, from the hand of Geraint.

And Geraint journeyed along the high road that was before him, and the
maiden went on first; and near them they beheld a valley which was the
fairest ever seen, and which had a large river running through it; and
there was a bridge over the river, and the high road led to the bridge.
And above the bridge upon the opposite side of the river, they beheld a
fortified town, the fairest ever seen.  And as they approached the
bridge, Geraint saw coming towards him from a thick copse a man mounted
upon a large and lofty steed, even of pace and spirited though tractable.
“Ah, knight,” said Geraint, “whence comest thou?”  “I come,” said he,
“from the valley below us.”  “Canst thou tell me,” said Geraint, “who is
the owner of this fair valley and yonder walled town?”  “I will tell
thee, willingly,” said he.  “Gwiffert Petit he is called by the Franks,
but the Cymry call him the Little King.”  “Can I go by yonder bridge,”
said Geraint, “and by the lower highway that is beneath the town?”  Said
the knight, “Thou canst not go by his tower on the other side of the
bridge, unless thou dost intend to combat him; because it is his custom
to encounter every knight that comes upon his lands.”  “I declare to
Heaven,” said Geraint, “that I will, nevertheless, pursue my journey that
way.”  “If thou dost so,” said the knight, “thou wilt probably meet with
shame and disgrace in reward for thy daring.”  Then Geraint proceeded
along the road that led to the town, and the road brought him to a ground
that was hard, and rugged, and high, and ridgy.  And as he journeyed
thus, he beheld a knight following him upon a warhorse, strong, and
large, and proudly-stepping, and wide-hoofed, and broad-chested.  And he
never saw a man of smaller stature than he who was upon the horse.  And
both he and his horse were completely armed.  When he had overtaken
Geraint, he said to him, “Tell me, chieftain, whether it is through
ignorance or through presumption that thou seekest to insult my dignity,
and to infringe my rules.”  “Nay,” answered Geraint, “I knew not this
road was forbid to any.”  “Thou didst know it,” said the other; “come
with me to my Court, to give me satisfaction.”  “That will I not, by my
faith,” said Geraint; “I would not go even to thy Lord’s Court, excepting
Arthur were thy Lord.”  “By the hand of Arthur himself,” said the knight,
“I will have satisfaction of thee, or receive my overthrow at thy hands.”
And immediately they charged one another.  And a squire of his came to
serve him with lances as he broke them.  And they gave each other such
hard and severe strokes that their shields lost all their colour.  But it
was very difficult for Geraint to fight with him on account of his small
size, for he was hardly able to get a full aim at him with all the
efforts he could make.  And they fought thus until their horses were
brought down upon their knees; and at length Geraint threw the knight
headlong to the ground; and then they fought on foot, and they gave one
another blows so boldly fierce, so frequent, and so severely powerful,
that their helmets were pierced, and their skullcaps were broken, and
their arms were shattered, and the light of their eyes was darkened by
sweat and blood.  At the last Geraint became enraged, and he called to
him all his strength; and boldly angry, and swiftly resolute, and
furiously determined, he lifted up his sword, and struck him on the crown
of his head a blow so mortally painful, so violent, so fierce, and so
penetrating, that it cut through all his head armour, and his skin, and
his flesh, until it wounded the very bone, and the sword flew out of the
hand of the Little King to the furthest end of the plain, and he besought
Geraint that he would have mercy and compassion upon him.  “Though thou
hast been neither courteous nor just,” said Geraint, “thou shalt have
mercy, upon condition that thou wilt become my ally, and engage never to
fight against me again, but to come to my assistance whenever thou
hearest of my being in trouble.”  “This will I do, gladly, Lord,” said
he.  So he pledged him his faith thereof.  “And now, Lord, come with me,”
said he, “to my Court yonder, to recover from thy weariness and fatigue.”
“That will I not, by Heaven,” said he.

Then Gwiffert Petit beheld Enid where she stood, and it grieved him to
see one of her noble mien appear so deeply afflicted.  And he said to
Geraint, “My Lord, thou doest wrong not to take repose, and refresh
thyself awhile; for, if thou meetest with any difficulty in thy present
condition, it will not be easy for thee to surmount it.”  But Geraint
would do no other than proceed on his journey, and he mounted his horse
in pain, and all covered with blood.  And the maiden went on first, and
they proceeded towards the wood which they saw before them.

And the heat of the sun was very great, and through the blood and sweat,
Geraint’s armour cleaved to his flesh; and when they came into the wood,
he stood under a tree, to avoid the sun’s heat; and his wounds pained him
more than they had done at the time when he received them.  And the
maiden stood under another tree.  And lo! they heard the sound of horns,
and a tumultuous noise; and the occasion of it was, that Arthur and his
company had come down to the wood.  And while Geraint was considering
which way he should go to avoid them, behold, he was espied by a
foot-page, who was an attendant on the Steward of the Household; and he
went to the Steward, and told him what kind of man he had seen in the
wood.  Then the Steward caused his horse to be saddled, and he took his
lance and his shield, and went to the place where Geraint was.  “Ah,
knight!” said he, “what dost thou here?”  “I am standing under a shady
tree, to avoid the heat and the rays of the sun.”  “Wherefore is thy
journey, and who art thou?”  “I seek adventures, and go where I list.”
“Indeed,” said Kai; “then come with me to see Arthur, who is here hard
by.”  “That will I not, by Heaven,” said Geraint.  “Thou must needs
come,” said Kai.  Then Geraint knew who he was, but Kai did not know
Geraint.  And Kai attacked Geraint as best he could.  And Geraint became
wroth, and he struck him with the shaft of his lance, so that he rolled
headlong to the ground.  But chastisement worse than this would he not
inflict on him.

Scared and wildly Kai arose, and he mounted his horse, and went back to
his lodging.  And thence he proceeded to Gwalchmai’s tent.  “Oh, Sir,”
said he to Gwalchmai, “I was told by one of the attendants, that he saw
in the wood above a wounded knight, having on battered armour; and if
thou dost right, thou wilt go and see if this be true.”  “I care not if I
do so,” said Gwalchmai.  “Take, then, thy horse, and some of thy armour,”
said Kai; “for I hear that he is not over courteous to those who approach
him.”  So Gwalchmai took his spear and his shield, and mounted his horse,
and came to the spot where Geraint was.  “Sir Knight,” said he,
“wherefore is thy journey?”  “I journey for my own pleasure, and to seek
the adventures of the world.”  “Wilt thou tell me who thou art; or wilt
thou come and visit Arthur, who is near at hand?”  “I will make no
alliance with thee, nor will I go and visit Arthur,” said he.  And he
knew that it was Gwalchmai, but Gwalchmai knew him not.  “I purpose not
to leave thee,” said Gwalchmai, “till I know who thou art.”  And he
charged him with his lance, and struck him on his shield, so that the
shaft was shivered into splinters, and their horses were front to front.
Then Gwalchmai gazed fixedly upon him, and he knew him.  “Ah, Geraint,”
said he, “is it thou that art here?”  “I am not Geraint,” said he.
“Geraint thou art, by Heaven,” he replied, “and a wretched and insane
expedition is this.”  Then he looked around, and beheld Enid, and he
welcomed her gladly.  “Geraint,” said Gwalchmai, “come thou and see
Arthur; he is thy lord and thy cousin.”  “I will not,” said he, “for I am
not in a fit state to go and see any one.”  Thereupon, behold, one of the
pages came after Gwalchmai to speak to him.  So he sent him to apprise
Arthur that Geraint was there wounded, and that he would not go to visit
him, and that it was pitiable to see the plight that he was in.  And this
he did without Geraint’s knowledge, inasmuch as he spoke in a whisper to
the page.  “Entreat Arthur,” said he, “to have his tent brought near to
the road, for he will not meet him willingly, and it is not easy to
compel him in the mood he is in.”  So the page came to Arthur, and told
him this.  And he caused his tent to be removed unto the side of the
road.  And the maiden rejoiced in her heart.  And Gwalchmai led Geraint
onwards along the road, till they came to the place where Arthur was
encamped, and the pages were pitching his tent by the roadside.  “Lord,”
said Geraint, “all hail unto thee.”  “Heaven prosper thee; and who art
thou?” said Arthur.  “It is Geraint,” said Gwalchmai, “and of his own
free will would he not come to meet thee.”  “Verily,” said Arthur, “he is
bereft of his reason.”  Then came Enid, and saluted Arthur.  “Heaven
protect thee,” said he.  And thereupon he caused one of the pages to take
her from her horse.  “Alas! Enid,” said Arthur, “what expedition is
this?”  “I know not, Lord,” said she, “save that it behoves me to journey
by the same road that he journeys.”  “My Lord,” said Geraint, “with thy
permission we will depart.”  “Whither wilt thou go?” said Arthur.  “Thou
canst not proceed now, unless it be unto thy death.”  “He will not suffer
himself to be invited by me,” said Gwalchmai.  “But by me he will,” said
Arthur; “and, moreover, he does not go from here until he is healed.”  “I
had rather, Lord,” said Geraint, “that thou wouldest let me go forth.”
“That will I not, I declare to Heaven,” said he.  Then he caused a maiden
to be sent for to conduct Enid to the tent where Gwenhwyvar’s chamber
was.  And Gwenhwyvar and all her women were joyful at her coming; and
they took off her riding-dress, and placed other garments upon her.
Arthur also called Kadyrieith, and ordered him to pitch a tent for
Geraint and the physicians; and he enjoined him to provide him with
abundance of all that might be requisite for him.  And Kadyrieith did as
he had commanded him.  And Morgan Tud and his disciples were brought to
Geraint.

And Arthur and his hosts remained there nearly a month, whilst Geraint
was being healed.  And when he was fully recovered, Geraint came to
Arthur, and asked his permission to depart.  “I know not if thou art
quite well.”  “In truth I am, Lord,” said Geraint.  “I shall not believe
thee concerning that, but the physicians that were with thee.”  So Arthur
caused the physicians to be summoned to him, and asked them if it were
true.  “It is true, Lord,” said Morgan Tud.  So the next day Arthur
permitted him to go forth, and he pursued his journey.  And on the same
day Arthur removed thence.  And Geraint desired Enid to go on, and to
keep before him, as she had formerly done.  And she went forward along
the high road.  And as they journeyed thus, they heard an exceeding loud
wailing near to them.  “Stay thou here,” said he, “and I will go and see
what is the cause of this wailing.”  “I will,” said she.  Then he went
forward unto an open glade that was near the road.  And in the glade he
saw two horses, one having a man’s saddle, and the other a woman’s saddle
upon it.  And, behold, there was a knight lying dead in his armour, and a
young damsel in a riding-dress standing over him, lamenting.  “Ah! Lady,”
said Geraint, “what hath befallen thee?”  “Behold,” she answered, “I
journeyed here with my beloved husband, when, lo! three giants came upon
us, and without any cause in the world, they slew him.”  “Which way went
they hence?” said Geraint.  “Yonder by the high road,” she replied.  So
he returned to Enid.  “Go,” said he, “to the lady that is below yonder,
and await me there till I come.”  She was sad when he ordered her to do
thus, but nevertheless she went to the damsel, whom it was ruth to hear,
and she felt certain that Geraint would never return.  Meanwhile Geraint
followed the giants, and overtook them.  And each of them was greater of
stature than three other men, and a huge club was on the shoulder of
each.  Then he rushed upon one of them, and thrust his lance through his
body.  And having drawn it forth again, he pierced another of them
through likewise.  But the third turned upon him, and struck him with his
club, so that he split his shield, and crushed his shoulder, and opened
his wounds anew, and all his blood began to flow from him.  But Geraint
drew his sword, and attacked the giant, and gave him a blow on the crown
of his head so severe, and fierce, and violent, that his head and his
neck were split down to his shoulders, and he fell dead.  So Geraint left
him thus, and returned to Enid.  And when he saw her, he fell down
lifeless from his horse.  Piercing, and loud, and thrilling was the cry
that Enid uttered.  And she came and stood over him where he had fallen.
And at the sound of her cries came the Earl of Limours, and the host that
journeyed with him, whom her lamentations brought out of their road.  And
the Earl said to Enid, “Alas, Lady, what hath befallen thee?”  “Ah! good
Sir,” said she, “the only man I have loved, or ever shall love, is
slain.”  Then he said to the other, “And what is the cause of thy grief?”
“They have slain my beloved husband also,” said she.  “And who was it
that slew them?”  “Some giants,” she answered, “slew my best-beloved, and
the other knight went in pursuit of them, and came back in the state thou
seest, his blood flowing excessively; but it appears to me that he did
not leave the giants without killing some of them, if not all.”  The Earl
caused the knight that was dead to be buried, but he thought that there
still remained some life in Geraint; and to see if he yet would live, he
had him carried with him in the hollow of his shield, and upon a bier.
And the two damsels went to the Court; and when they arrived there,
Geraint was placed upon a litter-couch in front of the table that was in
the hall.  Then they all took off their travelling gear, and the Earl
besought Enid to do the same, and to clothe herself in other garments.
“I will not, by Heaven,” said she.  “Ah! Lady,” said he, “be not so
sorrowful for this matter.”  “It were hard to persuade me to be
otherwise,” said she.  “I will act towards thee in such wise, that thou
needest not be sorrowful, whether yonder knight live or die.  Behold, a
good Earldom, together with myself, will I bestow on thee; be, therefore,
happy and joyful.”  “I declare to Heaven,” said she, “that henceforth I
shall never be joyful while I live.”  “Come, then,” said he, “and eat.”
“No, by Heaven, I will not,” she answered.  “But, by Heaven, thou shalt,”
said he.  So he took her with him to the table against her will, and many
times desired her to eat.  “I call Heaven to witness,” said she, “that I
will not eat until the man that is upon yonder bier shall eat likewise.”
“Thou canst not fulfil that,” said the Earl, “yonder man is dead
already.”  “I will prove that I can,” said she.  Then he offered her a
goblet of liquor.  “Drink this goblet,” he said, “and it will cause thee
to change thy mind.”  “Evil betide me,” she answered, “if I drink aught
until he drink also.”  “Truly,” said the Earl, “it is of no more avail
for me to be gentle with thee than ungentle.”  And he gave her a box on
the ear.  Thereupon she raised a loud and piercing shriek, and her
lamentations were much greater than they had been before, for she
considered in her mind that had Geraint been alive, he durst not have
struck her thus.  But, behold, at the sound of her cry, Geraint revived
from his swoon, and he sat up on the bier, and finding his sword in the
hollow of his shield, he rushed to the place where the Earl was, and
struck him a fiercely-wounding, severely-venomous, and sternly-smiting
blow upon the crown of his head, so that he clove him in twain, until his
sword was stayed by the table.  Then all left the board, and fled away.
And this was not so much through fear of the living as through the dread
they felt at seeing the dead man rise up to slay them.  And Geraint
looked upon Enid, and he was grieved for two causes; one was, to see that
Enid had lost her colour and her wonted aspect, and the other, to know
that she was in the right.  “Lady,” said he, “knowest thou where our
horses are?”  “I know, Lord, where thy horse is,” she replied, “but I
know not where is the other.  Thy horse is in the house yonder.”  So he
went to the house, and brought forth his horse, and mounted him, and took
up Enid from the ground, and placed her upon the horse with him.  And he
rode forward.  And their road lay between two hedges.  And the night was
gaining on the day.  And lo! they saw behind them the shafts of spears
betwixt them and the sky, and they heard the trampling of horses, and the
noise of a host approaching.  “I hear something following us,” said he,
“and I will put thee on the other side of the hedge.”  And thus he did.
And thereupon, behold, a knight pricked towards him, and couched his
lance.  When Enid saw this, she cried out, saying, “Oh! chieftain,
whoever thou art, what renown wilt thou gain by slaying a dead man?”
“Oh! Heaven,” said he, “is it Geraint?”  “Yes, in truth,” said she.  “And
who art thou?”  “I am the Little King,” he answered, “coming to thy
assistance, for I heard that thou wast in trouble.  And if thou hadst
followed my advice, none of these hardships would have befallen thee.”
“Nothing can happen,” said Geraint, “without the will of Heaven, though
much good results from counsel.”  “Yes,” said the Little King, “and I
know good counsel for thee now.  Come with me to the court of a
son-in-law of my sister, which is near here, and thou shalt have the best
medical assistance in the kingdom.”  “I will do so gladly,” said Geraint.
And Enid was placed upon the horse of one of the Little King’s squires,
and they went forward to the Baron’s palace.  And they were received
there with gladness, and they met with hospitality and attention.  And
the next morning they went to seek physicians; and it was not long before
they came, and they attended Geraint until he was perfectly well.  And
while Geraint was under medical care, the Little King caused his armour
to be repaired, until it was as good as it had ever been.  And they
remained there a fortnight and a month.

Then the Little King said to Geraint, “Now will we go towards my own
Court, to take rest, and amuse ourselves.”  “Not so,” said Geraint, “we
will first journey for one day more, and return again.”  “With all my
heart,” said the Little King, “do thou go then.”  And early in the day
they set forth.  And more gladly and more joyfully did Enid journey with
them that day than she had ever done.  And they came to the main road.
And when they reached a place where the road divided in two, they beheld
a man on foot coming towards them along one of these roads, and Gwiffert
asked the man whence he came.  “I come,” said he, “from an errand in the
country.”  “Tell me,” said Geraint, “which is the best for me to follow
of these two roads?”  “That is the best for thee to follow,” answered he,
“for if thou goest by this one, thou wilt never return.  Below us,” said
he, “there is a hedge of mist, and within it are enchanted games, and no
one who has gone there has ever returned.  And the Court of the Earl
Owain is there, and he permits no one to go to lodge in the town, except
he will go to his Court.”  “I declare to Heaven,” said Geraint, “that we
will take the lower road.”  And they went along it until they came to the
town.  And they took the fairest and pleasantest place in the town for
their lodging.  And while they were thus, behold, a young man came to
them, and greeted them.  “Heaven be propitious to thee,” said they.
“Good Sirs,” said he, “what preparations are you making here?”  “We are
taking up our lodging,” said they, “to pass the night.”  “It is not the
custom with him who owns the town,” he answered, “to permit any of gentle
birth, unless they come to stay in his Court, to abide here; therefore,
come ye to the Court.”  “We will come, gladly,” said Geraint.  And they
went with the page, and they were joyfully received.  And the Earl came
to the hall to meet them, and he commanded the tables to be laid.  And
they washed, and sat down.  And this is the order in which they sat:
Geraint on one side of the Earl, and Enid on the other side, and next to
Enid the Little King, and then the Countess next to Geraint; and all
after that as became their rank.  Then Geraint recollected the games, and
thought that he should not go to them; and on that account he did not
eat.  Then the Earl looked upon Geraint, and considered, and he bethought
him that his not eating was because of the games, and it grieved him that
he had ever established those games, were it only on account of losing
such a youth as Geraint.  And if Geraint had asked him to abolish the
games, he would gladly have done so.  Then the Earl said to Geraint,
“What thought occupies thy mind, that thou dost not eat?  If thou
hesitatest about going to the games, thou shalt not go, and no other of
thy rank shall ever go either.”  “Heaven reward thee,” said Geraint, “but
I wish nothing better than to go to the games, and to be shown the way
thither.”  “If that is what thou dost prefer, thou shalt obtain it
willingly.”  “I do prefer it, indeed,” said he.  Then they ate, and they
were amply served, and they had a variety of gifts, and abundance of
liquor.  And when they had finished eating they arose.  And Geraint
called for his horse and his armour, and he accoutred both himself and
his horse.  And all the hosts went forth until they came to the side of
the hedge, and the hedge was so lofty, that it reached as high as they
could see in the air, and upon every stake in the hedge, except two,
there was the head of a man, and the number of stakes throughout the
hedge was very great.  Then said the Little King, “May no one go in with
the chieftain?”  “No one may,” said Earl Owain.  “Which way can I enter?”
inquired Geraint.  “I know not,” said Owain, “but enter by the way that
thou wilt, and that seemeth easiest to thee.”

Then fearlessly and unhesitatingly Geraint dashed forward into the mist.
And on leaving the mist, he came to a large orchard; and in the orchard
he saw an open space, wherein was a tent of red satin; and the door of
the tent was open, and an apple-tree stood in front of the door of the
tent; and on a branch of the apple-tree hung a huge hunting-horn.  Then
he dismounted, and went into the tent; and there was no one in the tent
save one maiden sitting in a golden chair, and another chair was opposite
to her, empty.  And Geraint went to the empty chair, and sat down
therein.  “Ah! chieftain,” said the maiden, “I would not counsel thee to
sit in that chair.”  “Wherefore?” said Geraint.  “The man to whom that
chair belongs has never suffered another to sit in it.”  “I care not,”
said Geraint, “though it displease him that I sit in the chair.”  And
thereupon they heard a mighty tumult around the tent.  And Geraint looked
to see what was the cause of the tumult.  And he beheld without a knight
mounted upon a warhorse, proudly snorting, high-mettled, and large of
bone; and a robe of honour in two parts was upon him and upon his horse,
and beneath it was plenty of armour.  “Tell me, chieftain,” said he to
Geraint, “who it was that bade thee sit there?”  “Myself,” answered he.
“It was wrong of thee to do me this shame and disgrace.  Arise, and do me
satisfaction for thine insolence.”  Then Geraint arose; and they
encountered immediately; and they broke a set of lances, and a second
set, and a third; and they gave each other fierce and frequent strokes;
and at last Geraint became enraged, and he urged on his horse, and rushed
upon him, and gave him a thrust on the centre of his shield, so that it
was split, and so that the head of his lance went through his armour, and
his girths were broken, and he himself was borne headlong to the ground
the length of Geraint’s lance and arm, over his horse’s crupper.  “Oh, my
Lord!” said he, “thy mercy, and thou shalt have what thou wilt.”  “I only
desire,” said Geraint, “that this game shall no longer exist here, nor
the hedge of mist, nor magic, nor enchantment.”  “Thou shalt have this
gladly, Lord,” he replied.  “Cause, then, the mist to disappear from this
place,” said Geraint.  “Sound yonder horn,” said he, “and when thou
soundest it, the mist will vanish; but it will not go hence unless the
horn be blown by the knight by whom I am vanquished.”  And sad and
sorrowful was Enid where she remained, through anxiety concerning
Geraint.  Then Geraint went and sounded the horn.  And at the first blast
he gave, the mist vanished.  And all the hosts came together, and they
all became reconciled to each other.  And the Earl invited Geraint and
the Little King to stay with him that night.  And the next morning they
separated.  And Geraint went towards his own dominions; and thenceforth
he reigned prosperously, and his warlike fame and splendour lasted with
renown and honour both to him and to Enid from that time forth.




KILHWCH AND OLWEN
OR THE
TWRCH TRWYTH


KILYDD the son of Prince Kelyddon desired a wife as a helpmate, and the
wife that he chose was Goleuddydd, the daughter of Prince Anlawdd.  And
after their union, the people put up prayers that they might have an
heir.  And they had a son through the prayers of the people.  From the
time of her pregnancy Goleuddydd became wild, and wandered about, without
habitation; but when her delivery was at hand, her reason came back to
her.  Then she went to a mountain where there was a swineherd, keeping a
herd of swine.  And through fear of the swine the queen was delivered.
And the swineherd took the boy, and brought him to the palace; and he was
christened, and they called him Kilhwch, because he had been found in a
swine’s burrow.  Nevertheless the boy was of gentle lineage, and cousin
unto Arthur; and they put him out to nurse.

After this the boy’s mother, Goleuddydd, the daughter of Prince Anlawdd,
fell sick.  Then she called her husband unto her, and said to him, “Of
this sickness I shall die, and thou wilt take another wife.  Now wives
are the gift of the Lord, but it would be wrong for thee to harm thy son.
Therefore I charge thee that thou take not a wife until thou see a briar
with two blossoms upon my grave.”  And this he promised her.  Then she
besought him to dress her grave every year, that nothing might grow
thereon.  So the queen died.  Now the king sent an attendant every
morning to see if anything were growing upon the grave.  And at the end
of the seventh year the master neglected that which he had promised to
the queen.

One day the king went to hunt, and he rode to the place of burial to see
the grave, and to know if it were time that he should take a wife; and
the king saw the briar.  And when he saw it, the king took counsel where
he should find a wife.  Said one of his counsellors, “I know a wife that
will suit thee well, and she is the wife of King Doged.”  And they
resolved to go to seek her; and they slew the king, and brought away his
wife and one daughter that she had along with her.  And they conquered
the king’s lands.

On a certain day, as the lady walked abroad, she came to the house of an
old crone that dwelt in the town, and that had no tooth in her head.  And
the queen said to her, “Old woman, tell me that which I shall ask thee,
for the love of Heaven.  Where are the children of the man who has
carried me away by violence?”  Said the crone, “He has not children.”
Said the queen, “Woe is me, that I should have come to one who is
childless!”  Then said the hag, “Thou needest not lament on account of
that, for there is a prediction he shall have an heir by thee, and by
none other.  Moreover, be not sorrowful, for he has one son.”

The lady returned home with joy; and she asked her consort, “Wherefore
hast thou concealed thy children from me?”  The king said, “I will do so
no longer.”  And he sent messengers for his son, and he was brought to
the Court.  His stepmother said unto him, “It were well for thee to have
a wife, and I have a daughter who is sought of every man of renown in the
world.”  “I am not yet of an age to wed,” answered the youth.  Then said
she unto him, “I declare to thee, that it is thy destiny not to be suited
with a wife until thou obtain Olwen, the daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr.”
And the youth blushed, and the love of the maiden diffused itself through
all his frame, although he had never seen her.  And his father inquired
of him, “What has come over thee, my son, and what aileth thee?”  “My
stepmother has declared to me that I shall never have a wife until I
obtain Olwen, the daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr.”  “That will be easy
for thee,” answered his father.  “Arthur is thy cousin.  Go, therefore,
unto Arthur, to cut thy hair, and ask this of him as a boon.”

And the youth pricked forth upon a steed with head dappled grey, of four
winters old, firm of limb, with shell-formed hoofs, having a bridle of
linked gold on his head, and upon him a saddle of costly gold.  And in
the youth’s hand were two spears of silver, sharp, well-tempered, headed
with steel, three ells in length, of an edge to wound the wind, and cause
blood to flow, and swifter than the fall of the dewdrop from the blade of
reed-grass upon the earth when the dew of June is at the heaviest.  A
gold-hilted sword was upon his thigh, the blade of which was of gold,
bearing a cross of inlaid gold of the hue of the lightning of heaven: his
war-horn was of ivory.  Before him were two brindled white-breasted
greyhounds, having strong collars of rubies about their necks, reaching
from the shoulder to the ear.  And the one that was on the left side
bounded across to the right side, and the one on the right to the left,
and like two sea-swallows sported around him.  And his courser cast up
four sods with his four hoofs, like four swallows in the air, about his
head, now above, now below.  About him was a four-cornered cloth of
purple, and an apple of gold was at each corner, and every one of the
apples was of the value of an hundred kine.  And there was precious gold
of the value of three hundred kine upon his shoes, and upon his stirrups,
from his knee to the tip of his toe.  And the blade of grass bent not
beneath him, so light was his courser’s tread as he journeyed towards the
gate of Arthur’s Palace.

Spoke the youth, “Is there a porter?”  “There is; and if thou holdest not
thy peace, small will be thy welcome.  I am Arthur’s porter every first
day of January.  And during every other part of the year but this, the
office is filled by Huandaw, and Gogigwc, and Llaeskenym, and
Pennpingyon, who goes upon his head to save his feet, neither towards the
sky nor towards the earth, but like a rolling stone upon the floor of the
court.”  “Open the portal.”  “I will not open it.”  “Wherefore not?”
“The knife is in the meat, and the drink is in the horn, and there is
revelry in Arthur’s Hall, and none may enter therein but the son of a
king of a privileged country, or a craftsman bringing his craft.  But
there will be refreshment for thy dogs, and for thy horses; and for thee
there will be collops cooked and peppered, and luscious wine and mirthful
songs, and food for fifty men shall be brought unto thee in the guest
chamber, where the stranger and the sons of other countries eat, who come
not unto the precincts of the Palace of Arthur.  Thou wilt fare no worse
there than thou wouldest with Arthur in the Court.  A lady shall smooth
thy couch, and shall lull thee with songs; and early to-morrow morning,
when the gate is open for the multitude that come hither to-day, for thee
shall it be opened first, and thou mayest sit in the place that thou
shalt choose in Arthur’s Hall, from the upper end to the lower.”  Said
the youth, “That will I not do.  If thou openest the gate, it is well.
If thou dost not open it, I will bring disgrace upon thy Lord, and evil
report upon thee.  And I will set up three shouts at this very gate, than
which none were ever more deadly, from the top of Pengwaed in Cornwall to
the bottom of Dinsol, in the North, and to Esgair Oervel, in Ireland.
And all the women in this Palace that are pregnant shall lose their
offspring; and such as are not pregnant, their hearts shall be turned by
illness, so that they shall never bear children from this day forward.”
“What clamour soever thou mayest make,” said Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr,
“against the laws of Arthur’s Palace shalt thou not enter therein, until
I first go and speak with Arthur.”

Then Glewlwyd went into the Hall.  And Arthur said to him, “Hast thou
news from the gate?”—“Half of my life is past, and half of thine.  I was
heretofore in Kaer Se and Asse, in Sach and Salach, in Lotor and Fotor;
and I have been heretofore in India the Great and India the Lesser; and I
was in the battle of Dau Ynyr, when the twelve hostages were brought from
Llychlyn.  And I have also been in Europe, and in Africa, and in the
islands of Corsica, and in Caer Brythwch, and Brythach, and Verthach; and
I was present when formerly thou didst slay the family of Clis the son of
Merin, and when thou didst slay Mil Du the son of Ducum, and when thou
didst conquer Greece in the East.  And I have been in Caer Oeth and
Annoeth, and in Caer Nevenhyr; nine supreme sovereigns, handsome men, saw
we there, but never did I behold a man of equal dignity with him who is
now at the door of the portal.”  Then said Arthur, “If walking thou didst
enter in here, return thou running.  And every one that beholds the
light, and every one that opens and shuts the eye, let them shew him
respect, and serve him, some with gold-mounted drinking-horns, others
with collops cooked and peppered, until food and drink can be prepared
for him.  It is unbecoming to keep such a man as thou sayest he is, in
the wind and the rain.”  Said Kai, “By the hand of my friend, if thou
wouldest follow my counsel, thou wouldest not break through the laws of
the Court because of him.”  “Not so, blessed Kai.  It is an honour to us
to be resorted to, and the greater our courtesy the greater will be our
renown, and our fame, and our glory.”

And Glewlwyd came to the gate, and opened the gate before him; and
although all dismounted upon the horseblock at the gate, yet did he not
dismount, but rode in upon his charger.  Then said Kilhwch, “Greeting be
unto thee, Sovereign Ruler of this Island; and be this greeting no less
unto the lowest than unto the highest, and be it equally unto thy guests,
and thy warriors, and thy chieftains—let all partake of it as completely
as thyself.  And complete be thy favour, and thy fame, and thy glory,
throughout all this Island.”  “Greeting unto thee also,” said Arthur;
“sit thou between two of my warriors, and thou shalt have minstrels
before thee, and thou shalt enjoy the privileges of a king born to a
throne, as long as thou remainest here.  And when I dispense my presents
to the visitors and strangers in this Court, they shall be in thy hand at
my commencing.”  Said the youth, “I came not here to consume meat and
drink; but if I obtain the boon that I seek, I will requite it thee, and
extol thee; and if I have it not, I will bear forth thy dispraise to the
four quarters of the world, as far as thy renown has extended.”  Then
said Arthur, “Since thou wilt not remain here, chieftain, thou shalt
receive the boon whatsoever thy tongue may name, as far as the wind
dries, and the rain moistens, and the sun revolves, and the sea
encircles, and the earth extends; save only my ship; and my mantle; and
Caledvwlch, my sword; and Rhongomyant, my lance; and Wynebgwrthucher, my
shield; and Carnwenhau, my dagger; and Gwenhwyvar, my wife.  By the truth
of Heaven, thou shalt have it cheerfully, name what thou wilt.”  “I would
that thou bless my hair.”  “That shall be granted thee.”

And Arthur took a golden comb, and scissors, whereof the loops were of
silver, and he combed his hair.  And Arthur inquired of him who he was.
“For my heart warms unto thee, and I know that thou art come of my blood.
Tell me, therefore, who thou art.”  “I will tell thee,” said the youth.
“I am Kilhwch, the son of Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon, by
Goleuddydd, my mother, the daughter of Prince Anlawdd.”  “That is true,”
said Arthur; “thou art my cousin.  Whatsoever boon thou mayest ask, thou
shalt receive, be it what it may that thy tongue shall name.”  “Pledge
the truth of Heaven and the faith of thy kingdom thereof.”  “I pledge it
thee, gladly.”  “I crave of thee then, that thou obtain for me Olwen, the
daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr; and this boon I likewise seek at the
hands of thy warriors.  I seek it from Kai, and Bedwyr, and Greidawl
Galldonyd, and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl, and Greid the son of Eri, and
Kynddelig Kyvarwydd, and Tathal Twyll Goleu, and Maelwys the son of
Baeddan, and Crychwr the son of Nes, and Cubert the son of Daere, and
Percos the son of Poch, and Lluber Beuthach, and Corvil Bervach, and
Gwynn the son of Nudd, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd, and Gadwy the son of
Geraint, and Prince Fflewddur Fflam, and Ruawn Pebyr the son of Dorath,
and Bradwen the son of Moren Mynawc, and Moren Mynawc himself, and
Dalldav the son of Kimin Côv, and the son of Alun Dyved, and the son of
Saidi, and the son of Gwryon, and Uchtryd Ardywad Kad, and Kynwas
Curvagyl, and Gwrhyr Gwarthegvras, and Isperyr Ewingath, and Gallcoyt
Govynynat, and Duach, and Grathach, and Nerthach, the sons of Gwawrddur
Kyrvach (these men came forth from the confines of hell), and Kilydd
Canhastyr, and Canastyr Kanllaw, and Cors Cant-Ewin, and Esgeir Gulhwch
Govynkawn, and Drustwrn Hayarn, and Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr, and Lloch
Llawwynnyawc, and Aunwas Adeiniawc, and Sinnoch the son of Seithved, and
Gwennwynwyn the son of Naw, and Bedyw the son of Seithved, and Gobrwy the
son of Echel Vorddwyttwll, and Echel Vorddwyttwll himself, and Mael the
son of Roycol, and Dadweir Dallpenn, and Garwyli the son of Gwythawc
Gwyr, and Gwythawc Gwyr himself, and Gormant the son of Ricca, and Menw
the son of Teirgwaedd, and Digon the son of Alar, and Selyf the son of
Smoit, and Gusg the son of Atheu, and Nerth the son of Kedarn, and
Drudwas the son of Tryffin, and Twrch the son of Perif, and Twrch the son
of Annwas, and Iona king of France, and Sel the son of Selgi, and Teregud
the son of Iaen, and Sulyen the son of Iaen, and Bradwen the son of Iaen,
and Moren the son of Iaen, and Siawn the son of Iaen, and Cradawc the son
of Iaen.  (They were men of Caerdathal, of Arthur’s kindred on his
father’s side.)  Dirmyg the son of Kaw, and Justic the son of Kaw, and
Etmic the son of Kaw, and Anghawd the son of Kaw, and Ovan the son of
Kaw, and Kelin the son of Kaw, and Connyn the son of Kaw, and Mabsant the
son of Kaw, and Gwyngad the son of Kaw, and Llwybyr the son of Kaw, and
Coth the son of Kaw, and Meilic the son of Kaw, and Kynwas the son of
Kaw, and Ardwyad the son of Kaw, and Ergyryad the son of Kaw, and Neb the
son of Kaw, and Gilda the son of Kaw, and Calcas the son of Kaw, and
Hueil the son of Kaw (he never yet made a request at the hand of any
Lord).  And Samson Vinsych, and Taliesin the chief of the bards, and
Manawyddan the son of Llyr, and Llary the son of Prince Kasnar, and
Ysperni the son of Fflergant king of Armorica, and Saranhon the son of
Glythwyr, and Llawr Eilerw, and Annyanniawc the son of Menw the son of
Teirgwaedd, and Gwynn the son of Nwyvre, and Fflam the son of Nwyvre, and
Geraint the son of Erbin, and Ermid the son of Erbin, and Dyvel the son
of Erbin, and Gwynn the son of Ermid, and Kyndrwyn the son of Ermid, and
Hyveidd Unllenn, and Eiddon Vawr Vrydic, and Reidwn Arwy, and Gormant the
son of Ricca (Arthur’s brother by his mother’s side; the Penhynev of
Cornwall was his father), and Llawnrodded Varvawc, and Nodawl Varyf
Twrch, and Berth the son of Kado, and Rheidwn the son of Beli, and
Iscovan Hael, and Iscawin the son of Panon, and Morvran the son of Tegid
(no one struck him in the battle of Camlan by reason of his ugliness; all
thought he was an auxiliary devil.  Hair had he upon him like the hair of
a stag).  And Sandde Bryd Angel (no one touched him with a spear in the
battle of Camlan because of his beauty; all thought he was a ministering
angel).  And Kynwyl Sant (the third man that escaped from the battle of
Camlan, and he was the last who parted from Arthur on Hengroen his
horse).  And Uchtryd the son of Erim, and Eus the son of Erim, and Henwas
Adeinawg the son of Erim, and Henbedestyr the son of Erim, and Sgilti
Yscawndroed the son of Erim. (Unto these three men belonged these three
qualities,—With Henbedestyr there was not any one who could keep pace,
either on horseback or on foot; with Henwas Adeinawg, no four-footed
beast could run the distance of an acre, much less could it go beyond it;
and as to Sgilti Yscawndroed, when he intended to go upon a message for
his Lord, he never sought to find a path, but knowing whither he was to
go, if his way lay through a wood he went along the tops of the trees.
During his whole life, a blade of reed grass bent not beneath his feet,
much less did one ever break, so lightly did he tread.)  Teithi Hên the
son of Gwynhan (his dominions were swallowed up by the sea, and he
himself hardly escaped, and he came to Arthur; and his knife had this
peculiarity, that from the time that he came there no haft would ever
remain upon it, and owing to this a sickness came over him, and he pined
away during the remainder of his life, and of this he died).  And
Carneddyr the son of Govynyon Hên, and Gwenwynwyn the son of Nav
Gyssevin, Arthur’s champion, and Llysgadrudd Emys, and Gwrbothu Hên
(uncles unto Arthur were they, his mother’s brothers).  Kulvanawyd the
son of Goryon, and Llenlleawg Wyddel from the headland of Ganion, and
Dyvynwal Moel, and Dunard king of the North, Teirnon Twryf Bliant, and
Tegvan Gloff, and Tegyr Talgellawg, Gwrdinal the son of Ebrei, and
Morgant Hael, Gwystyl the son of Rhun the son of Nwython, and Llwyddeu
the son of Nwython, and Gwydre the son of Llwyddeu (Gwenabwy the daughter
of [Kaw] was his mother, Hueil his uncle stabbed him, and hatred was
between Hueil and Arthur because of the wound).  Drem the son of Dremidyd
(when the gnat arose in the morning with the sun, he could see it from
Gelli Wic in Cornwall, as far off as Pen Blathaon in North Britain).  And
Eidyol the son of Ner, and Glwyddyn Saer (who constructed Ehangwen,
Arthur’s Hall).  Kynyr Keinvarvawc (when he was told he had a son born he
said to his wife, ‘Damsel, if thy son be mine, his heart will be always
cold, and there will be no warmth in his hands; and he will have another
peculiarity, if he is my son he will always be stubborn; and he will have
another peculiarity, when he carries a burden, whether it be large or
small, no one will be able to see it, either before him or at his back;
and he will have another peculiarity, no one will be able to resist fire
and water so well as he will; and he will have another peculiarity, there
will never be a servant or an officer equal to him’).  Henwas, and
Henwyneb (an old companion to Arthur).  Gwallgoyc (another; when he came
to a town, though there were three hundred houses in it, if he wanted
anything, he would not let sleep come to the eyes of any one whilst he
remained there).  Berwyn the son of Gerenhir, and Paris king of France,
and Osla Gyllellvawr (who bore a short broad dagger.  When Arthur and his
hosts came before a torrent, they would seek for a narrow place where
they might pass the water, and would lay the sheathed dagger across the
torrent, and it would form a bridge sufficient for the armies of the
three Islands of Britain, and of the three islands adjacent, with their
spoil).  Gwyddawg the son of Menestyr (who slew Kai, and whom Arthur
slew, together with his brothers, to revenge Kai).  Garanwyn the son of
Kai, and Amren the son of Bedwyr, and Ely Amyr, and Rheu Rhwyd Dyrys, and
Rhun Rhudwern, and Eli, and Trachmyr (Arthur’s chief huntsmen).  And
Llwyddeu the son of Kelcoed, and Hunabwy the son of Gwryon, and Gwynn
Godyvron, and Gweir Datharwenniddawg, and Gweir the son of Cadell the son
of Talaryant, and Gweir Gwrhyd Ennwir, and Gweir Paladyr Hir (the uncles
of Arthur, the brothers of his mother).  The sons of Llwch Llawwynnyawg
(from beyond the raging sea).  Llenlleawg Wyddel, and Ardderchawg
Prydain.  Cas the son of Saidi, Gwrvan Gwallt Avwyn, and Gwyllennhin the
king of France, and Gwittart the son of Oedd king of Ireland.  Garselit
Wyddel, Panawr Pen Bagad, and Ffleudor the son of Nav, Gwynnhyvar mayor
of Cornwall and Devon (the ninth man that rallied the battle of Camlan).
Keli and Kueli, and Gilla Coes Hydd (he would clear three hundred acres
at one bound: the chief leaper of Ireland was he).  Sol, and Gwadyn
Ossol, and Gwadyn Odyeith.  (Sol could stand all day upon one foot.
Gwadyn Ossol, if he stood upon the top of the highest mountain in the
world, it would become a level plain under his feet.  Gwadyn Odyeith, the
soles of his feet emitted sparks of fire when they struck upon things
hard, like the heated mass when drawn out of the forge.  He cleared the
way for Arthur when he came to any stoppage.)  Hirerwm and Hiratrwm.
(The day they went on a visit three Cantrevs provided for their
entertainment, and they feasted until noon and drank until night, when
they went to sleep.  And then they devoured the heads of the vermin
through hunger, as if they had never eaten anything.  When they made a
visit they left neither the fat nor the lean, neither the hot nor the
cold, the sour nor the sweet, the fresh nor the salt, the boiled nor the
raw.)  Huarwar the son of Aflawn (who asked Arthur such a boon as would
satisfy him.  It was the third great plague of Cornwall when he received
it.  None could get a smile from him but when he was satisfied).  Gware
Gwallt Euryn.  The two cubs of Gast Rhymi, Gwyddrud and Gwyddneu Astrus.
Sugyn the son of Sugnedydd (who would suck up the sea on which were three
hundred ships so as to leave nothing but a dry strand.  He was
broad-chested).  Rhacymwri, the attendant of Arthur (whatever barn he was
shown, were there the produce of thirty ploughs within it, he would
strike it with an iron flail until the rafters, the beams, and the boards
were no better than the small oats in the mow upon the floor of the
barn).  Dygyflwng and Anoeth Veidawg.  And Hir Eiddyl, and Hir Amreu
(they were two attendants of Arthur).  And Gwevyl the son of Gwestad (on
the day that he was sad, he would let one of his lips drop below his
waist, while he turned up the other like a cap upon his head).  Uchtryd
Varyf Draws (who spread his red untrimmed beard over the eight-and-forty
rafters which were in Arthur’s Hall).  Elidyr Gyvarwydd.  Yskyrdav and
Yscudydd (two attendants of Gwenhwyvar were they.  Their feet were swift
as their thoughts when bearing a message).  Brys the son of Bryssethach
(from the Hill of the Black Fernbrake in North Britain).  And Grudlwyn
Gorr.  Bwlch, and Kyfwlch, and Sefwlch, the sons of Cleddyf Kyfwlch, the
grandsons of Cleddyf Difwlch.  (Their three shields were three gleaming
glitterers; their three spears were three pointed piercers; their three
swords were three grinding gashers; Glas, Glessic, and Gleisad.  Their
three dogs, Call, Cuall, and Cavall.  Their three horses, Hwyrdyddwd, and
Drwgdyddwd, and Llwyrdyddwg.  Their three wives, Och, and Garym, and
Diaspad.  Their three grandchildren, Lluched, and Neved, and Eissiwed.
Their three daughters, Drwg, and Gwaeth, and Gwaethav Oll.  Their three
hand-maids, Eheubryd the daughter of Kyfwlch, Gorascwrn the daughter of
Nerth, Ewaedan the daughter of Kynvelyn Keudawd Pwyll the half-man.)
Dwnn Diessic Unbenn, Eiladyr the son of Pen Llarcau, Kynedyr Wyllt the
son of Hettwn Talaryant, Sawyl Ben Uchel, Gwalchmai the son of Gwyar,
Gwalhaved the son of Gwyar, Gwrhyr Gwastawd Ieithoedd (to whom all
tongues were known), and Kethcrwm the Priest.  Clust the son of
Clustveinad (though he were buried seven cubits beneath the earth, he
would hear the ant fifty miles off rise from her nest in the morning).
Medyr the son of Methredydd (from Gelli Wic he could, in a twinkling,
shoot the wren through the two legs upon Esgeir Oervel in Ireland).
Gwiawn Llygad Cath (who could cut a haw from the eye of the gnat without
hurting him).  Ol the son of Olwydd (seven years before he was born his
father’s swine were carried off, and when he grew up a man he tracked the
swine, and brought them back in seven herds).  Bedwini the Bishop (who
blessed Arthur’s meat and drink).  For the sake of the golden-chained
daughters of this island.  For the sake of Gwenhwyvar its chief lady, and
Gwennhwyach her sister, and Rathtyeu the only daughter of Clemenhill, and
Rhelemon the daughter of Kai, and Tannwen the daughter of Gweir
Datharwenîddawg.  Gwenn Alarch the daughter of Kynwyl Canbwch.  Eurneid
the daughter of Clydno Eiddin.  Eneuawc the daughter of Bedwyr.  Enrydreg
the daughter of Tudvathar.  Gwennwledyr the daughter of Gwaledyr Kyrvach.
Erddudnid the daughter of Tryffin.  Eurolwen the daughter of Gwdolwyn
Gorr.  Teleri the daughter of Peul.  Indeg the daughter of Garwy Hir.
Morvudd the daughter of Urien Rheged.  Gwenllian Deg the majestic maiden.
Creiddylad the daughter of Lludd Llaw Ereint.  (She was the most splendid
maiden in the three Islands of the mighty, and in the three Islands
adjacent, and for her Gwythyr the son of Greidawl and Gwynn the son of
Nudd fight every first of May until the day of doom.)  Ellylw the
daughter of Neol Kynn-Crog (she lived three ages).  Essyllt Vinwen and
Essyllt Vingul.”  And all these did Kilhwch the son of Kilydd adjure to
obtain his boon.

Then said Arthur, “Oh! chieftain, I have never heard of the maiden of
whom thou speakest, nor of her kindred, but I will gladly send messengers
in search of her.  Give me time to seek her.”  And the youth said, “I
will willingly grant from this night to that at the end of the year to do
so.”  Then Arthur sent messengers to every land within his dominions to
seek for the maiden; and at the end of the year Arthur’s messengers
returned without having gained any knowledge or intelligence concerning
Olwen more than on the first day.  Then said Kilhwch, “Every one has
received his boon, and I yet lack mine.  I will depart and bear away thy
honour with me.”  Then said Kai, “Rash chieftain! dost thou reproach
Arthur?  Go with us, and we will not part until thou dost either confess
that the maiden exists not in the world, or until we obtain her.”
Thereupon Kai rose up.  Kai had this peculiarity, that his breath lasted
nine nights and nine days under water, and he could exist nine nights and
nine days without sleep.  A wound from Kai’s sword no physician could
heal.  Very subtle was Kai.  When it pleased him he could render himself
as tall as the highest tree in the forest.  And he had another
peculiarity,—so great was the heat of his nature, that, when it rained
hardest, whatever he carried remained dry for a handbreadth above and a
handbreadth below his hand; and when his companions were coldest, it was
to them as fuel with which to light their fire.

And Arthur called Bedwyr, who never shrank from any enterprise upon which
Kai was bound.  None was equal to him in swiftness throughout this island
except Arthur and Drych Ail Kibddar.  And although he was one-handed,
three warriors could not shed blood faster than he on the field of
battle.  Another property he had; his lance would produce a wound equal
to those of nine opposing lances.

And Arthur called to Kynddelig the Guide, “Go thou upon this expedition
with the chieftain.”  For as good a guide was he in a land which he had
never seen as he was in his own.

He called Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, because he knew all tongues.

He called Gwalchmai the son of Gwyar, because he never returned home
without achieving the adventure of which he went in quest.  He was the
best of footmen and the best of knights.  He was nephew to Arthur, the
son of his sister, and his cousin.

And Arthur called Menw the son of Teirgwaedd, in order that if they went
into a savage country, he might cast a charm and an illusion over them,
so that none might see them whilst they could see every one.

They journeyed until they came to a vast open plain, wherein they saw a
great castle, which was the fairest of the castles of the world.  And
they journeyed that day until the evening, and when they thought they
were nigh to the castle, they were no nearer to it than they had been in
the morning.  And the second and the third day they journeyed, and even
then scarcely could they reach so far.  And when they came before the
castle, they beheld a vast flock of sheep, which was boundless and
without an end.  And upon the top of a mound there was a herdsman,
keeping the sheep.  And a rug made of skins was upon him; and by his side
was a shaggy mastiff, larger than a steed nine winters old.  Never had he
lost even a lamb from his flock, much less a large sheep.  He let no
occasion ever pass without doing some hurt and harm.  All the dead trees
and bushes in the plain he burnt with his breath down to the very ground.

Then said Kai, “Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, go thou and salute yonder
man.”  “Kai,” said he, “I engaged not to go further than thou thyself.”
“Let us go then together,” answered Kai.  Said Menw the son of
Teirgwaedd, “Fear not to go thither, for I will cast a spell upon the
dog, so that he shall injure no one.”  And they went up to the mound
whereon the herdsman was, and they said to him, “How dost thou fare, O
herdsman?”  “No less fair be it to you than to me.”  “Truly, art thou the
chief?”  “There is no hurt to injure me but my own.” {5}  “Whose are the
sheep that thou dost keep, and to whom does yonder castle belong?”
“Stupid are ye, truly!  Through the whole world is it known that this is
the castle of Yspaddaden Penkawr.”  “And who art thou?”  “I am called
Custennin the son of Dyfnedig, and my brother Yspaddaden Penkawr
oppressed me because of my possessions.  And ye also, who are ye?”  “We
are an embassy from Arthur, come to seek Olwen the daughter of Yspaddaden
Penkawr.”  “Oh men! the mercy of Heaven be upon you, do not that for all
the world.  None who ever came hither on this quest has returned alive.”
And the herdsman rose up.  And as he arose, Kilhwch gave unto him a ring
of gold.  And he sought to put on the ring, but it was too small for him,
so he placed it in the finger of his glove.  And he went home, and gave
the glove to his spouse to keep.  And she took the ring from the glove
when it was given her, and she said, “Whence came this ring, for thou art
not wont to have good fortune?”  “I went,” said he, “to the sea to seek
for fish, and lo, I saw a corpse borne by the waves.  And a fairer corpse
than it did I never behold.  And from its finger did I take this ring.”
“O man! does the sea permit its dead to wear jewels?  Show me then this
body.”  “Oh wife, him to whom this ring belonged thou shalt see here in
the evening.”  “And who is he?” asked the woman, “Kilhwch the son of
Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon, by Goleuddydd the daughter of Prince
Anlawdd, his mother, who is come to seek Olwen as his wife.”  And when
she heard that, her feelings were divided between the joy that she had
that her nephew, the son of her sister, was coming to her, and sorrow
because she had never known any one depart alive who had come on that
quest.

And they went forward to the gate of Custennin the herdsman’s dwelling.
And when she heard their footsteps approaching, she ran out with joy to
meet them.  And Kai snatched a billet out of the pile.  And when she met
them she sought to throw her arms about their necks.  And Kai placed the
log between her two hands, and she squeezed it so that it became a
twisted coil.  “Oh woman,” said Kai, “if thou hadst squeezed me thus,
none could ever again have set their affections on me.  Evil love were
this.”  They entered into the house, and were served; and soon after they
all went forth to amuse themselves.  Then the woman opened a stone chest
that was before the chimney-corner, and out of it arose a youth with
yellow curling hair.  Said Gwrhyr, “It is a pity to hide this youth.  I
know that it is not his own crime that is thus visited upon him.”  “This
is but a remnant,” said the woman.  “Three-and-twenty of my sons has
Yspaddaden Penkawr slain, and I have no more hope of this one than of the
others.”  Then said Kai, “Let him come and be a companion with me, and he
shall not be slain unless I also am slain with him.”  And they ate.  And
the woman asked them, “Upon what errand come you here?”  “We come to seek
Olwen for this youth.”  Then said the woman, “In the name of Heaven,
since no one from the castle hath yet seen you, return again whence you
came.”  “Heaven is our witness, that we will not return until we have
seen the maiden.”  Said Kai, “Does she ever come hither, so that she may
be seen?”  “She comes here every Saturday to wash her head, and in the
vessel where she washes, she leaves all her rings, and she never either
comes herself or sends any messengers to fetch them.”

“Will she come here if she is sent to?”  “Heaven knows that I will not
destroy my soul, nor will I betray those that trust me; unless you will
pledge me your faith that you will not harm her, I will not send to her.”
“We pledge it,” said they.  So a message was sent, and she came.

The maiden was clothed in a robe of flame-coloured silk, and about her
neck was a collar of ruddy gold, on which were precious emeralds and
rubies.  More yellow was her head than the flower of the broom, and her
skin was whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands and
her fingers than the blossoms of the wood anemone amidst the spray of the
meadow fountain.  The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the
three-mewed falcon was not brighter than hers.  Her bosom was more snowy
than the breast of the white swan, her cheek was redder than the reddest
roses.  Whoso beheld her was filled with her love.  Four white trefoils
sprung up wherever she trod.  And therefore was she called Olwen.

She entered the house, and sat beside Kilhwch upon the foremost bench;
and as soon as he saw her he knew her.  And Kilhwch said unto her, “Ah!
maiden, thou art she whom I have loved; come away with me, lest they
speak evil of thee and of me.  Many a day have I loved thee.”  “I cannot
do this, for I have pledged my faith to my father not to go without his
counsel, for his life will last only until the time of my espousals.
Whatever is, must be.  But I will give thee advice if thou wilt take it.
Go, ask me of my father, and that which he shall require of thee, grant
it, and thou wilt obtain me; but if thou deny him anything, thou wilt not
obtain me, and it will be well for thee if thou escape with thy life.”
“I promise all this, if occasion offer,” said he.

She returned to her chamber, and they all rose up and followed her to the
castle.  And they slew the nine porters that were at the nine gates in
silence.  And they slew the nine watch-dogs without one of them barking.
And they went forward to the hall.

“The greeting of Heaven and of man be unto thee, Yspaddaden Penkawr,”
said they.  “And you, wherefore come you?”  “We come to ask thy daughter
Olwen, for Kilhwch the son of Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon.”
“Where are my pages and my servants?  Raise up the forks beneath my two
eyebrows which have fallen over my eyes, that I may see the fashion of my
son-in-law.”  And they did so.  “Come hither to-morrow, and you shall
have an answer.”

They rose to go forth, and Yspaddaden Penkawr seized one of the three
poisoned darts that lay beside him, and threw it after them.  And Bedwyr
caught it, and flung it, and pierced Yspaddaden Penkawr grievously with
it through the knee.  Then he said, “A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly.
I shall ever walk the worse for his rudeness, and shall ever be without a
cure.  This poisoned iron pains me like the bite of a gadfly.  Cursed be
the smith who forged it, and the anvil whereon it was wrought!  So sharp
is it!”

That night also they took up their abode in the house of Custennin the
herdsman.  The next day with the dawn they arrayed themselves in haste
and proceeded to the castle, and entered the hall, and they said,
“Yspaddaden Penkawr, give us thy daughter in consideration of her dower
and her maiden fee, which we will pay to thee and to her two kinswomen
likewise.  And unless thou wilt do so, thou shalt meet with thy death on
her account.”  Then he said, “Her four great-grandmothers, and her four
great-grandsires are yet alive, it is needful that I take counsel of
them.”  “Be it so,” answered they, “we will go to meat.”  As they rose
up, he took the second dart that was beside him, and cast it after them.
And Menw the son of Gwaedd caught it, and flung it back at him, and
wounded him in the centre of the breast, so that it came out at the small
of his back.  “A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly,” said he, “the hard
iron pains me like the bite of a horse-leech.  Cursed be the hearth
whereon it was heated, and the smith who formed it!  So sharp is it!
Henceforth, whenever I go up a hill, I shall have a scant in my breath,
and a pain in my chest, and I shall often loathe my food.”  And they went
to meat.

And the third day they returned to the palace.  And Yspaddaden Penkawr
said to them, “Shoot not at me again unless you desire death.  Where are
my attendants?  Lift up the forks of my eyebrows which have fallen over
my eyeballs, that I may see the fashion of my son-in-law.”  Then they
arose, and, as they did so, Yspaddaden Penkawr took the third poisoned
dart and cast it at them.  And Kilhwch caught it and threw it vigorously,
and wounded him through the eyeball, so that the dart came out at the
back of his head.  “A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly!  As long as I
remain alive, my eyesight will be the worse.  Whenever I go against the
wind, my eyes will water; and peradventure my head will burn, and I shall
have a giddiness every new moon.  Cursed be the fire in which it was
forged.  Like the bite of a mad dog is the stroke of this poisoned iron.”
And they went to meat.

And the next day they came again to the palace, and they said, “Shoot not
at us any more, unless thou desirest such hurt, and harm, and torture as
thou now hast, and even more.”  “Give me thy daughter, and if thou wilt
not give her, thou shalt receive thy death because of her.”  “Where is he
that seeks my daughter?  Come hither where I may see thee.”  And they
placed him a chair face to face with him.

Said Yspaddaden Penkawr, “Is it thou that seekest my daughter?”  “It is
I,” answered Kilhwch.  “I must have thy pledge that thou wilt not do
towards me otherwise than is just, and when I have gotten that which I
shall name, my daughter thou shalt have.”  “I promise thee that
willingly,” said Kilhwch, “name what thou wilt.”  “I will do so,” said
he.

“Seest thou yonder vast hill?”  “I see it.”  “I require that it be rooted
up, and that the grubbings be burned for manure on the face of the land,
and that it be ploughed and sown in one day, and in one day that the
grain ripen.  And of that wheat I intend to make food and liquor fit for
the wedding of thee and my daughter.  And all this I require done in one
day.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though this be easy for thee, there is yet that which will not be so.
No husbandman can till or prepare this land, so wild is it, except
Amaethon the son of Don, and he will not come with thee by his own free
will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Govannon the son of Don to come to the headland to rid the iron, he will
do no work of his own good will except for a lawful king, and thou wilt
not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; the two
dun oxen of Gwlwlyd, both yoked together, to plough the wild land yonder
stoutly.  He will not give them of his own free will, and thou wilt not
be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; the
yellow and the brindled bull yoked together do I require.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; the two
horned oxen, one of which is beyond, and the other this side of the
peaked mountain, yoked together in the same plough.  And these are
Nynniaw and Peibaw whom God turned into oxen on account of their sins.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Seest
thou yonder red tilled ground?”

“I see it.”

“When first I met the mother of this maiden, nine bushels of flax were
sown therein, and none has yet sprung up, neither white nor black; and I
have the measure by me still.  I require to have the flax to sow in the
new land yonder, that when it grows up it may make a white wimple for my
daughter’s head, on the day of thy wedding.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Honey
that is nine times sweeter than the honey of the virgin swarm, without
scum and bees, do I require to make bragget for the feast.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“The vessel of Llwyr the son of Llwyryon, which is of the utmost value.
There is no other vessel in the world that can hold this drink.  Of his
free will thou wilt not get it, and thou canst not compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
basket of Gwyddneu Garanhir, if the whole world should come together,
thrice nine men at a time, the meat that each of them desired would be
found within it.  I require to eat therefrom on the night that my
daughter becomes thy bride.  He will give it to no one of his own free
will, and thou canst not compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
horn of Gwlgawd Gododin to serve us with liquor that night.  He will not
give it of his own free will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
harp of Teirtu to play to us that night.  When a man desires that it
should play, it does so of itself, and when he desires that it should
cease, it ceases.  And this he will not give of his own free will, and
thou wilt not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
cauldron of Diwrnach Wyddel, the steward of Odgar the son of Aedd, king
of Ireland, to boil the meat for thy marriage feast.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  It is
needful for me to wash my head, and shave my beard, and I require the
tusk of Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd to shave myself withal, neither shall I
profit by its use if it be not plucked alive out of his head.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  There
is no one in the world that can pluck it out of his head except Odgar the
son of Aedd, king of Ireland.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  I will
not trust any one to keep the tusk except Gado of North Britain.  Now the
threescore Cantrevs of North Britain are under his sway, and of his own
free will he will not come out of his kingdom, and thou wilt not be able
to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  I must
spread out my hair in order to shave it, and it will never be spread out
unless I have the blood of the jet-black sorceress, the daughter of the
pure white sorceress, from Pen Nant Govid, on the confines of Hell.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  I will
not have the blood unless I have it warm, and no vessels will keep warm
the liquid that is put therein except the bottles of Gwyddolwyd Gorr,
which preserve the heat of the liquor that is put into them in the east,
until they arrive at the west.  And he will not give them of his own free
will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Some
will desire fresh milk, and it will not be possible to have fresh milk
for all, unless we have the bottles of Rhinnon Rhin Barnawd, wherein no
liquor ever turns sour.  And he will not give them of his own free will,
and thou wilt not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is not a comb or scissors with which I can
arrange my hair, on account of its rankness, except the comb and scissors
that are between the two ears of Twrch Trwyth, the son of Prince Tared.
He will not give them of his own free will, and thou wilt not be able to
compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  It
will not be possible to hunt Twrch Trwyth without Drudwyn the whelp of
Greid, the son of Eri.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is not a leash that can hold him, except the
leash of Cwrs Cant Ewin.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is no collar that will hold the leash except
the collar of Canhastyr Canllaw.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
chain of Kilydd Canhastyr to fasten the collar to the leash.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is not a huntsman who can hunt with this dog,
except Mabon the son of Modron.  He was taken from his mother when three
nights old, and it is not known where he now is, nor whether he is living
or dead.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Gwynn
Mygdwn, the horse of Gweddw, that is as swift as the wave, to carry Mabon
the son of Modron to hunt the boar Trwyth.  He will not give him of his
own free will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Thou
wilt not get Mabon, for it is not known where he is, unless thou find
Eidoel, his kinsman in blood, the son of Aer.  For it would be useless to
seek for him.  He is his cousin.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Garselit the Gwyddelian is the chief huntsman of Ireland; the Twrch
Trwyth can never be hunted without him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  A
leash made from the beard of Dillus Varvawc, for that is the only one
that can hold those two cubs.  And the leash will be of no avail unless
it be plucked from his beard while he is alive, and twitched out with
wooden tweezers.  While he lives he will not suffer this to be done to
him, and the leash will be of no use should he be dead, because it will
be brittle.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is no huntsman that can hold those two whelps
except Kynedyr Wyllt, the son of Hettwn Glafyrawc; he is nine times more
wild than the wildest beast upon the mountains.  Him wilt thou never get,
neither wilt thou ever get my daughter.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  It is
not possible to hunt the boar Trwyth without Gwynn the son of Nudd, whom
God has placed over the brood of devils in Annwvyn, lest they should
destroy the present race.  He will never be spared thence.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  There
is not a horse in the world that can carry Gwynn to hunt the Twrch
Trwyth, except Du, the horse of Mor of Oerveddawg.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Until
Gilennhin the king of France shall come, the Twrch Trwyth cannot be
hunted.  It will be unseemly for him to leave his kingdom for thy sake,
and he will never come hither.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
Twrch Trwyth can never be hunted without the son of Alun Dyved; he is
well skilled in letting loose the dogs.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
Twrch Trwyth cannot be hunted unless thou get Aned and Aethlem.  They are
as swift as the gale of wind, and they were never let loose upon a beast
that they did not kill him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; Arthur
and his companions to hunt the Twrch Trwyth.  He is a mighty man, and he
will not come for thee, neither wilt thou be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
Twrch Trwyth cannot be hunted unless thou get Bwlch, and Kyfwlch [and
Sefwlch], the grandsons of Cleddyf Difwlch.  Their three shields are
three gleaming glitterers.  Their three spears are three pointed
piercers.  Their three swords are three griding gashers, Glas, Glessic,
and Clersag.  Their three dogs, Call, Cuall, and Cavall.  Their three
horses, Hwyrdydwg, and Drwgdydwg, and Llwyrdydwg.  Their three wives,
Och, and Garam, and Diaspad.  Their three grandchildren, Lluched, and
Vyned, and Eissiwed.  Their three daughters, Drwg, and Gwaeth, and
Gwaethav Oll.  Their three hand-maids [Eheubryd, the daughter of Kyfwlch;
Gorasgwrn, the daughter of Nerth; and Gwaedan, the daughter of Kynvelyn].
These three men shall sound the horn, and all the others shall shout, so
that all will think that the sky is falling to the earth.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
sword of Gwrnach the Giant; he will never be slain except therewith.  Of
his own free will he will not give it, either for a price or as a gift,
and thou wilt never be able to compel him.”

“It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.”

“Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Difficulties shalt thou meet with, and nights without sleep, in seeking
this, and if thou obtain it not, neither shalt thou obtain my daughter.”

“Horses shall I have, and chivalry; and my lord and kinsman Arthur will
obtain for me all these things.  And I shall gain thy daughter, and thou
shalt lose thy life.”

“Go forward.  And thou shalt not be chargeable for food or raiment for my
daughter while thou art seeking these things; and when thou hast
compassed all these marvels, thou shalt have my daughter for thy wife.”

                                * * * * *

All that day they journeyed until the evening, and then they beheld a
vast castle, which was the largest in the world.  And lo, a black man,
huger than three of the men of this world, came out from the castle.  And
they spoke unto him, “Whence comest thou, O man?”  “From the castle which
you see yonder.”  “Whose castle is that?” asked they.  “Stupid are ye
truly, O men.  There is no one in the world that does not know to whom
this castle belongs.  It is the castle of Gwrnach the Giant.”  “What
treatment is there for guests and strangers that alight in that castle?”
“Oh!  Chieftain, Heaven protect thee.  No guest ever returned thence
alive, and no one may enter therein unless he brings with him his craft.”

Then they proceeded towards the gate.  Said Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd,
“Is there a porter?”  “There is.  And thou, if thy tongue be not mute in
thy head, wherefore dost thou call?”  “Open the gate.”  “I will not open
it.”  “Wherefore wilt thou not?”  “The knife is in the meat, and the
drink is in the horn, and there is revelry in the hall of Gwrnach the
Giant, and except for a craftsman who brings his craft, the gate will not
be opened to-night.”  “Verily, porter,” then said Kai, “my craft bring I
with me.”  “What is thy craft?”  “The best burnisher of swords am I in
the world.”  “I will go and tell this unto Gwrnach the Giant, and I will
bring thee an answer.”

So the porter went in, and Gwrnach said to him, “Hast thou any news from
the gate?”  “I have.  There is a party at the door of the gate who desire
to come in.”  “Didst thou inquire of them if they possessed any art?”  “I
did inquire,” said he, “and one told me that he was well skilled in the
burnishing of swords.”  “We have need of him then.  For some time have I
sought for some one to polish my sword, and could find no one.  Let this
man enter, since he brings with him his craft.”  The porter thereupon
returned and opened the gate.  And Kai went in by himself, and he saluted
Gwrnach the Giant.  And a chair was placed for him opposite to Gwrnach.
And Gwrnach said to him, “Oh man! is it true that is reported of thee,
that thou knowest how to burnish swords?”  “I know full well how to do
so,” answered Kai.  Then was the sword of Gwrnach brought to him.  And
Kai took a blue whetstone from under his arm, and asked him whether he
would have it burnished white or blue.  “Do with it as it seems good to
thee, and as thou wouldest if it were thine own.”  Then Kai polished one
half of the blade and put it in his hand.  “Will this please thee?” asked
he.  “I would rather than all that is in my dominions that the whole of
it were like unto this.  It is a marvel to me that such a man as thou
should be without a companion.”  “Oh! noble sir, I have a companion,
albeit he is not skilled in this art.”  “Who may he be?”  “Let the porter
go forth, and I will tell him whereby he may know him.  The head of his
lance will leave its shaft, and draw blood from the wind, and will
descend upon its shaft again.”  Then the gate was opened, and Bedwyr
entered.  And Kai said, “Bedwyr is very skilful, although he knows not
this art.”

And there was much discourse among those who were without, because that
Kai and Bedwyr had gone in.  And a young man who was with them, the only
son of Custennin the herdsman, got in also.  And he caused all his
companions to keep close to him as he passed the three wards, and until
he came into the midst of the castle.  And his companions said unto the
son of Custennin, “Thou hast done this!  Thou art the best of all men.”
And thenceforth he was called Goreu, the son of Custennin.  Then they
dispersed to their lodgings, that they might slay those who lodged
therein, unknown to the Giant.

The sword was now polished, and Kai gave it unto the hand of Gwrnach the
Giant, to see if he were pleased with his work.  And the Giant said, “The
work is good, I am content therewith.”  Said Kai, “It is thy scabbard
that hath rusted thy sword, give it to me that I may take out the wooden
sides of it and put in new ones.”  And he took the scabbard from him, and
the sword in the other hand.  And he came and stood over against the
Giant, as if he would have put the sword into the scabbard; and with it
he struck at the head of the Giant, and cut off his head at one blow.
Then they despoiled the castle, and took from it what goods and jewels
they would.  And again on the same day, at the beginning of the year,
they came to Arthur’s Court, bearing with them the sword of Gwrnach the
Giant.

Now, when they told Arthur how they had sped, Arthur said, “Which of
these marvels will it be best for us to seek first?”  “It will be best,”
said they, “to seek Mabon the son of Modron; and he will not be found
unless we first find Eidoel the son of Aer, his kinsman.”  Then Arthur
rose up, and the warriors of the Islands of Britain with him, to seek for
Eidoel; and they proceeded until they came before the Castle of Glivi,
where Eidoel was imprisoned.  Glivi stood on the summit of his castle,
and he said, “Arthur, what requirest thou of me, since nothing remains to
me in this fortress, and I have neither joy nor pleasure in it; neither
wheat nor oats?  Seek not therefore to do me harm.”  Said Arthur, “Not to
injure thee came I hither, but to seek for the prisoner that is with
thee.”  “I will give thee my prisoner, though I had not thought to give
him up to any one; and therewith shalt thou have my support and my aid.”

His followers said unto Arthur, “Lord, go thou home, thou canst not
proceed with thy host in quest of such small adventures as these.”  Then
said Arthur, “It were well for thee, Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, to go
upon this quest, for thou knowest all languages, and art familiar with
those of the birds and the beasts.  Thou, Eidoel, oughtest likewise to go
with my men in search of thy cousin.  And as for you, Kai and Bedwyr, I
have hope of whatever adventure ye are in quest of, that ye will achieve
it.  Achieve ye this adventure for me.”

They went forward until they came to the Ousel of Cilgwri.  And Gwrhyr
adjured her for the sake of Heaven, saying, “Tell me if thou knowest
aught of Mabon the son of Modron, who was taken when three nights old
from between his mother and the wall.”  And the Ousel answered, “When I
first came here, there was a smith’s anvil in this place, and I was then
a young bird; and from that time no work has been done upon it, save the
pecking of my beak every evening, and now there is not so much as the
size of a nut remaining thereof; yet the vengeance of Heaven be upon me,
if during all that time I have ever heard of the man for whom you
inquire.  Nevertheless I will do that which is right, and that which it
is fitting that I should do for an embassy from Arthur.  There is a race
of animals who were formed before me, and I will be your guide to them.”

So they proceeded to the place where was the Stag of Redynvre.  “Stag of
Redynvre, behold we are come to thee, an embassy from Arthur, for we have
not heard of any animal older than thou.  Say, knowest thou aught of
Mabon the son of Modron, who was taken from his mother when three nights
old?”  The Stag said, “When first I came hither, there was a plain all
around me, without any trees save one oak sapling, which grew up to be an
oak with an hundred branches.  And that oak has since perished, so that
now nothing remains of it but the withered stump; and from that day to
this I have been here, yet have I never heard of the man for whom you
inquire.  Nevertheless, being an embassy from Arthur, I will be your
guide to the place where there is an animal which was formed before I
was.”

So they proceeded to the place where was the Owl of Cwm Cawlwyd.  “Owl of
Cwm Cawlwyd, here is an embassy from Arthur; knowest thou aught of Mabon
the son of Modron, who was taken after three nights from his mother?”
“If I knew I would tell you.  When first I came hither, the wide valley
you see was a wooded glen.  And a race of men came and rooted it up.  And
there grew there a second wood; and this wood is the third.  My wings,
are they not withered stumps?  Yet all this time, even until to-day, I
have never heard of the man for whom you inquire.  Nevertheless, I will
be the guide of Arthur’s embassy until you come to the place where is the
oldest animal in this world, and the one that has travelled most, the
Eagle of Gwern Abwy.”

Gwrhyr said, “Eagle of Gwern Abwy, we have come to thee an embassy from
Arthur, to ask thee if thou knowest aught of Mabon the son of Modron, who
was taken from his mother when he was three nights old.”  The Eagle said,
“I have been here for a great space of time, and when I first came hither
there was a rock here, from the top of which I pecked at the stars every
evening; and now it is not so much as a span high.  From that day to this
I have been here, and I have never heard of the man for whom you inquire,
except once when I went in search of food as far as Llyn Llyw.  And when
I came there, I struck my talons into a salmon, thinking he would serve
me as food for a long time.  But he drew me into the deep, and I was
scarcely able to escape from him.  After that I went with my whole
kindred to attack him, and to try to destroy him, but he sent messengers,
and made peace with me; and came and besought me to take fifty fish
spears out of his back.  Unless he know something of him whom you seek, I
cannot tell who may.  However, I will guide you to the place where he
is.”

So they went thither; and the Eagle said, “Salmon of Llyn Llyw, I have
come to thee with an embassy from Arthur, to ask thee if thou knowest
aught concerning Mabon the son of Modron, who was taken away at three
nights old from his mother.”  “As much as I know I will tell thee.  With
every tide I go along the river upwards, until I come near to the walls
of Gloucester, and there have I found such wrong as I never found
elsewhere; and to the end that ye may give credence thereto, let one of
you go thither upon each of my two shoulders.”  So Kai and Gwrhyr
Gwalstawt Ieithoedd went upon the two shoulders of the salmon, and they
proceeded until they came unto the wall of the prison, and they heard a
great wailing and lamenting from the dungeon.  Said Gwrhyr, “Who is it
that laments in this house of stone?”  “Alas, there is reason enough for
whoever is here to lament.  It is Mabon the son of Modron who is here
imprisoned; and no imprisonment was ever so grievous as mine, neither
that of Llud Llaw Ereint, nor that of Greid the son of Eri.”  “Hast thou
hope of being released for gold or for silver, or for any gifts of
wealth, or through battle and fighting?”  “By fighting will whatever I
may gain be obtained.”

Then they went thence, and returned to Arthur, and they told him where
Mabon the son of Modron was imprisoned.  And Arthur summoned the warriors
of the Island, and they journeyed as far as Gloucester, to the place
where Mabon was in prison.  Kai and Bedwyr went upon the shoulders of the
fish, whilst the warriors of Arthur attacked the castle.  And Kai broke
through the wall into the dungeon, and brought away the prisoner upon his
back, whilst the fight was going on between the warriors.  And Arthur
returned home, and Mabon with him at liberty.

                                * * * * *

Said Arthur, “Which of the marvels will it be best for us now to seek
first?”  “It will be best to seek for the two cubs of Gast Rhymhi.”  “Is
it known,” asked Arthur, “where she is?”  “She is in Aber Deu Cleddyf,”
said one.  Then Arthur went to the house of Tringad, in Aber Cleddyf, and
he inquired of him whether he had heard of her there.  “In what form may
she be?”  “She is in the form of a she-wolf,” said he; “and with her
there are two cubs.”  “She has often slain my herds, and she is there
below in a cave in Aber Cleddyf.”

So Arthur went in his ship Prydwen by sea, and the others went by land,
to hunt her.  And they surrounded her and her two cubs, and God did
change them again for Arthur into their own form.  And the host of Arthur
dispersed themselves into parties of one and two.

                                * * * * *

On a certain day, as Gwythyr the son of Greidawl was walking over a
mountain, he heard a wailing and a grievous cry.  And when he heard it,
he sprang forward, and went towards it.  And when he came there, he drew
his sword, and smote off an ant-hill close to the earth, whereby it
escaped being burned in the fire.  And the ants said to him, “Receive
from us the blessing of Heaven, and that which no man can give we will
give thee.”  Then they fetched the nine bushels of flax-seed which
Yspaddaden Penkawr had required of Kilhwch, and they brought the full
measure without lacking any, except one flax-seed, and that the lame
pismire brought in before night.

                                * * * * *

As Kai and Bedwyr sat on a beacon carn on the summit of Plinlimmon, in
the highest wind that ever was in the world, they looked around them, and
saw a great smoke towards the south, afar off, which did not bend with
the wind.  Then said Kai, “By the hand of my friend, behold, yonder is
the fire of a robber!”  Then they hastened towards the smoke, and they
came so near to it, that they could see Dillus Varvawc scorching a wild
boar.  “Behold, yonder is the greatest robber that ever fled from
Arthur,” said Bedwyr unto Kai.  “Dost thou know him?”  “I do know him,”
answered Kai, “he is Dillus Varvawc, and no leash in the world will be
able to hold Drudwyn, the cub of Greid the son of Eri, save a leash made
from the beard of him thou seest yonder.  And even that will be useless,
unless his beard be plucked alive with wooden tweezers; for if dead, it
will be brittle.”  “What thinkest thou that we should do concerning
this?” said Bedwyr.  “Let us suffer him,” said Kai, “to eat as much as he
will of the meat, and after that he will fall asleep.”  And during that
time they employed themselves in making the wooden tweezers.  And when
Kai knew certainly that he was asleep, he made a pit under his feet, the
largest in the world, and he struck him a violent blow, and squeezed him
into the pit.  And there they twitched out his beard completely with the
wooden tweezers; and after that they slew him altogether.

And from thence they both went to Gelli Wic, in Cornwall, and took the
leash made of Dillus Varvawc’s beard with them, and they gave it into
Arthur’s hand.  Then Arthur composed this Englyn—

   Kai made a leash
   Of Dillus son of Eurei’s beard.
   Were he alive, thy death he’d be.

And thereupon Kai was wroth, so that the warriors of the Island could
scarcely make peace between Kai and Arthur.  And thenceforth, neither in
Arthur’s troubles, nor for the slaying of his men, would Kai come forward
to his aid for ever after.

                                * * * * *

Said Arthur, “Which of the marvels is it best for us now to seek?”  “It
is best for us to seek Drudwyn, the cub of Greid the son of Eri.”

A little while before this, Creiddylad the daughter of Lludd Llaw Ereint,
and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl, were betrothed.  And before she had
become his bride, Gwyn ap Nudd came and carried her away by force; and
Gwythyr the son of Greidawl gathered his host together, and went to fight
with Gwyn ap Nudd.  But Gwyn overcame him, and captured Greid the son of
Eri, and Glinneu the son of Taran, and Gwrgwst Ledlwm, and Dynvarth his
son.  And he captured Penn the son of Nethawg, and Nwython, and Kyledyr
Wyllt his son.  And they slew Nwython, and took out his heart, and
constrained Kyledyr to eat the heart of his father.  And therefrom
Kyledyr became mad.  When Arthur heard of this, he went to the North, and
summoned Gwyn ap Nudd before him, and set free the nobles whom he had put
in prison, and made peace between Gwyn ap Nudd and Gwythyr the son of
Griedawl.  And this was the peace that was made:—that the maiden should
remain in her father’s house, without advantage to either of them, and
that Gwyn ap Nudd and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl should fight for her
every first of May, from thenceforth until the day of doom, and that
whichever of them should then be conqueror should have the maiden.

And when Arthur had thus reconciled these chieftains, he obtained Mygdwn,
Gweddw’s horse, and the leash of Cwrs Cant Ewin.

And after that Arthur went into Armorica, and with him Mabon the son of
Mellt, and Gware Gwallt Euryn, to seek the two dogs of Glythmyr Ledewic.
And when he had got them, he went to the West of Ireland, in search of
Gwrgi Seven; and Odgar the son of Aedd king of Ireland went with him.
And thence went Arthur into the North, and captured Kyledyr Wyllt; and he
went after Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd.  And Mabon the son of Mellt came with
the two dogs of Glythmyr Ledewic in his hand, and Drudwyn, the cub of
Greid the son of Eri.  And Arthur went himself to the chase, leading his
own dog Cavall.  And Kaw, of North Britain, mounted Arthur’s mare
Llamrei, and was first in the attack.  Then Kaw, of North Britain,
wielded a mighty axe, and absolutely daring he came valiantly up to the
boar, and clave his head in twain.  And Kaw took away the tusk.  Now the
boar was not slain by the dogs that Yspaddaden had mentioned, but by
Cavall, Arthur’s own dog.

And after Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd was killed, Arthur and his host departed
to Gelli Wic in Cornwall.  And thence he sent Menw the son of Teirgwaedd
to see if the precious things were between the two ears of Twrch Trwyth,
since it were useless to encounter him if they were not there.  Albeit it
was certain where he was, for he had laid waste the third part of
Ireland.  And Menw went to seek for him, and he met with him in Ireland,
in Esgeir Oervel.  And Menw took the form of a bird; and he descended
upon the top of his lair, and strove to snatch away one of the precious
things from him, but he carried away nothing but one of his bristles.
And the boar rose up angrily and shook himself so that some of his venom
fell upon Menw, and he was never well from that day forward.

After this Arthur sent an embassy to Odgar, the son of Aedd king of
Ireland, to ask for the cauldron of Diwrnach Wyddel, his purveyor.  And
Odgar commanded him to give it.  But Diwrnach said, “Heaven is my
witness, if it would avail him anything even to look at it, he should not
do so.”  And the embassy of Arthur returned from Ireland with this
denial.  And Arthur set forward with a small retinue, and entered into
Prydwen, his ship, and went over to Ireland.  And they proceeded into the
house of Diwrnach Wyddel.  And the hosts of Odgar saw their strength.
When they had eaten and drunk as much as they desired, Arthur demanded to
have the cauldron.  And he answered, “If I would have given it to any
one, I would have given it at the word of Odgar king of Ireland.”

When he had given them this denial, Bedwyr arose and seized hold of the
cauldron, and placed it upon the back of Hygwyd, Arthur’s servant, who
was brother, by the mother’s side, to Arthur’s servant, Cachamwri.  His
office was always to carry Arthur’s cauldron, and to place fire under it.
And Llenlleawg Wyddel seized Caledvwlch, and brandished it.  And they
slew Diwrnach Wyddel and his company.  Then came the Irish and fought
with them.  And when he had put them to flight, Arthur with his men went
forward to the ship, carrying away the cauldron full of Irish money.  And
he disembarked at the house of Llwydden the son of Kelcoed, at Porth
Kerddin in Dyved.  And there is the measure of the cauldron.

Then Arthur summoned unto him all the warriors that were in the three
Islands of Britain, and in the three Islands adjacent, and all that were
in France and in Armorica, in Normandy and in the Summer Country, and all
that were chosen footmen and valiant horsemen.  And with all these he
went into Ireland.  And in Ireland there was great fear and terror
concerning him.  And when Arthur had landed in the country, there came
unto him the saints of Ireland and besought his protection.  And he
granted his protection unto them, and they gave him their blessing.  Then
the men of Ireland came unto Arthur, and brought him provisions.  And
Arthur went as far as Esgeir Oervel in Ireland, to the place where the
Boar Trwyth was with his seven young pigs.  And the dogs were let loose
upon him from all sides.  That day until evening the Irish fought with
him, nevertheless he laid waste the fifth part of Ireland.  And on the
day following the household of Arthur fought with him, and they were
worsted by him, and got no advantage.  And the third day Arthur himself
encountered him, and he fought with him nine nights and nine days without
so much as killing even one little pig.  The warriors inquired of Arthur
what was the origin of that swine; and he told them that he was once a
king, and that God had transformed him into a swine for his sins.

Then Arthur sent Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, to endeavour to speak with
him.  And Gwrhyr assumed the form of a bird, and alighted upon the top of
the lair, where he was with the seven young pigs.  And Gwrhyr Gwalstawt
Ieithoedd asked him, “By him who turned you into this form, if you can
speak, let some one of you, I beseech you, come and talk with Arthur.”
Grugyn Gwrych Ereint made answer to him.  (Now his bristles were like
silver wire, and whether he went through the wood or through the plain,
he was to be traced by the glittering of his bristles.)  And this was the
answer that Grugyn made: “By him who turned us into this form, we will
not do so, and we will not speak with Arthur.  That we have been
transformed thus is enough for us to suffer, without your coming here to
fight with us.”  “I will tell you.  Arthur comes but to fight for the
comb, and the razor, and the scissors which are between the two ears of
Twrch Trwyth.”  Said Grugyn, “Except he first take his life, he will
never have those precious things.  And to-morrow morning we will rise up
hence, and we will go into Arthur’s country, and there will we do all the
mischief that we can.”

So they set forth through the sea towards Wales.  And Arthur and his
hosts, and his horses and his dogs, entered Prydwen, that they might
encounter them without delay.  Twrch Trwyth landed in Porth Cleis in
Dyved, and Arthur came to Mynyw.  The next day it was told to Arthur that
they had gone by, and he overtook them as they were killing the cattle of
Kynnwas Kwrr y Vagyl, having slain all that were at Aber Gleddyf, of man
and beast, before the coming of Arthur.

Now when Arthur approached, Twrch Trwyth went on as far as Preseleu, and
Arthur and his hosts followed him thither, and Arthur sent men to hunt
him; Eli and Trachmyr, leading Drudwyn the whelp of Greid the son of Eri,
and Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw, in another quarter, with the two dogs of
Glythmyr Ledewic, and Bedwyr leading Cavall, Arthur’s own dog.  And all
the warriors ranged themselves around the Nyver.  And there came there
the three sons of Cleddyf Divwlch, men who had gained much fame at the
slaying of Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd; and they went on from Glyn Nyver, and
came to Cwm Kerwyn.

And there Twrch Trwyth made a stand, and slew four of Arthur’s champions,
Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw, and Tarawc of Allt Clwyd, and Rheidwn the son
of Eli Atver, and Iscovan Hael.  And after he had slain these men, he
made a second stand in the same place.  And there he slew Gwydre the son
of Arthur, and Garselit Wyddel, and Glew the son of Ysgawd, and Iscawyn
the son of Panon; and there he himself was wounded.

And the next morning before it was day, some of the men came up with him.
And he slew Huandaw, and Gogigwr, and Penpingon, three attendants upon
Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr, so that Heaven knows he had not an attendant
remaining, excepting only Llaesgevyn, a man from whom no one ever derived
any good.  And together with these he slew many of the men of that
country, and Gwlydyn Saer, Arthur’s chief Architect.

Then Arthur overtook him at Pelumyawc, and there he slew Madawc the son
of Teithyon, and Gwyn the son of Tringad, the son of Neved, and Eiryawn
Penllorau.  Thence he went to Aberteivi, where he made another stand, and
where he slew Kyflas the son of Kynan, and Gwilenhin king of France.
Then he went as far as Glyn Ystu, and there the men and the dogs lost
him.

Then Arthur summoned unto him Gwyn ab Nudd, and he asked him if he knew
aught of Twrch Trwyth.  And he said that he did not.

And all the huntsmen went to hunt the swine as far as Dyffryn Llychwr.
And Grugyn Gwallt Ereint and Llwydawg Govynnyad closed with them and
killed all the huntsmen, so that there escaped but one man only.  And
Arthur and his hosts came to the place where Grugyn and Llwydawg were.
And there he let loose the whole of the dogs upon them, and with the
shout and barking that was set up, Twrch Trwyth came to their assistance.

And from the time that they came across the Irish sea, Arthur had never
got sight of him until then.  So he set men and dogs upon him, and
thereupon he started off and went to Mynydd Amanw.  And there one of his
young pigs was killed.  Then they set upon him life for life, and Twrch
Llawin was slain, and then there was slain another of the swine, Gwys was
his name.  After that he went on to Dyffryn Amanw, and there Banw and
Bennwig were killed.  Of all his pigs there went with him alive from that
place none save Grugyn Gwallt Ereint and Llwydawg Govynnyad.

Thence he went on to Llwch Ewin, and Arthur overtook him there, and he
made a stand.  And there he slew Echel Forddwytwll, and Garwyli the son
of Gwyddawg Gwyr, and many men and dogs likewise.  And thence they went
to Llwch Tawy.  Grugyn Gwrych Ereint parted from them there, and went to
Din Tywi.  And thence he proceeded to Ceredigiawn, and Eli and Trachmyr
with him, and a multitude likewise.  Then he came to Garth Gregyn, and
there Llwydawg Govynnyad fought in the midst of them, and slew Rhudvyw
Rhys and many others with him.  Then Llwydawg went thence to Ystrad Yw,
and there the men of Armorica met him, and there he slew Hirpeissawg the
king of Armorica, and Llygatrudd Emys, and Gwrbothu, Arthur’s uncles, his
mother’s brothers, and there was he himself slain.

Twrch Trwyth went from there to between Tawy and Euyas, and Arthur
summoned all Cornwall and Devon unto him, to the estuary of the Severn,
and he said to the warriors of this Island, “Twrch Trwyth has slain many
of my men, but, by the valour of warriors, while I live he shall not go
into Cornwall.  And I will not follow him any longer, but I will oppose
him life to life.  Do ye as ye will.”  And he resolved that he would send
a body of knights, with the dogs of the Island, as far as Euyas, who
should return thence to the Severn, and that tried warriors should
traverse the Island, and force him into the Severn.  And Mabon the son of
Modron came up with him at the Severn, upon Gwynn Mygdwn, the horse of
Gweddw, and Goreu the son of Custennin, and Menw the son of Teirgwaedd;
this was betwixt Llyn Lliwan and Aber Gwy.  And Arthur fell upon him
together with the champions of Britain.  And Osla Kyllellvawr drew near,
and Manawyddan the son of Llyr, and Kacmwri the servant of Arthur, and
Gwyngelli, and they seized hold of him, catching him first by his feet,
and plunged him in the Severn, so that it overwhelmed him.  On the one
side, Mabon the son of Modron spurred his steed and snatched his razor
from him, and Kyledyr Wyllt came up with him on the other side, upon
another steed, in the Severn, and took from him the scissors.  But before
they could obtain the comb, he had regained the ground with his feet, and
from the moment that he reached the shore, neither dog, nor man, nor
horse could overtake him until he came to Cornwall.  If they had had
trouble in getting the jewels from him, much more had they in seeking to
save the two men from being drowned.  Kacmwri, as they drew him forth,
was dragged by two millstones into the deep.  And as Osla Kyllellvawr was
running after the boar, his knife had dropped out of the sheath, and he
had lost it, and after that, the sheath became full of water, and its
weight drew him down into the deep, as they were drawing him forth.

Then Arthur and his hosts proceeded until they overtook the boar in
Cornwall, and the trouble which they had met with before was mere play to
what they encountered in seeking the comb.  But from one difficulty to
another, the comb was at length obtained.  And then he was hunted from
Cornwall, and driven straight forward into the deep sea.  And thenceforth
it was never known whither he went; and Aned and Aethlem with him.  Then
went Arthur to Gelli Wic, in Cornwall, to anoint himself, and to rest
from his fatigues.

Said Arthur, “Is there any one of the marvels yet unobtained?”  Said one
of his men, “There is—the blood of the witch Orddu, the daughter of the
witch Orwen, of Pen Nant Govid, on the confines of Hell.”  Arthur set
forth towards the North, and came to the place where was the witch’s
cave.  And Gwyn ab Nudd, and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl, counselled him
to send Kacmwri, and Hygwyd his brother, to fight with the witch.  And as
they entered the cave, the witch seized upon them, and she caught Hygwyd
by the hair of his head, and threw him on the floor beneath her.  And
Kacmwri caught her by the hair of her head, and dragged her to the earth
from off Hygwyd, but she turned again upon them both, and drove them both
out with kicks and with cuffs.

And Arthur was wroth at seeing his two attendants almost slain, and he
sought to enter the cave; but Gwyn and Gwythyr said unto him, “It would
not be fitting or seemly for us to see thee squabbling with a hag.  Let
Hiramreu and Hireidil go to the cave.”  So they went.  But if great was
the trouble of the first two that went, much greater was that of these
two.  And Heaven knows that not one of the four could move from the spot,
until they placed them all upon Llamrei, Arthur’s mare.  And then Arthur
rushed to the door of the cave, and at the door he struck at the witch,
with Carnwennan his dagger, and clove her in twain, so that she fell in
two parts.  And Kaw, of North Britain, took the blood of the witch and
kept it.

Then Kilhwch set forward, and Goreu the son of Custennin with him, and as
many as wished ill to Yspaddaden Penkawr.  And they took the marvels with
them to his court.  And Kaw of North Britain came and shaved his beard,
skin, and flesh clean off to the very bone from ear to ear.  “Art thou
shaved, man?” said Kilhwch.  “I am shaved,” answered he.  “Is thy
daughter mine now?”  “She is thine,” said he, “but therefore needest thou
not thank me, but Arthur who hath accomplished this for thee.  By my free
will thou shouldest never have had her, for with her I lose my life.”
Then Goreu the son of Custennin seized him by the hair of his head, and
dragged him after him to the keep, and cut off his head and placed it on
a stake on the citadel.  Then they took possession of his castle, and of
his treasures.

And that night Olwen became Kilhwch’s bride, and she continued to be his
wife as long as she lived.  And the hosts of Arthur dispersed themselves,
each man to his own country.  And thus did Kilhwch obtain Olwen, the
daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr.




THE DREAM OF RHONABWY


MADAWC the son of Maredudd possessed Powys within its boundaries, from
Porfoed to Gwauan in the uplands of Arwystli.  And at that time he had a
brother, Iorwerth the son of Maredudd, in rank not equal to himself.  And
Iorwerth had great sorrow and heaviness because of the honour and power
that his brother enjoyed, which he shared not.  And he sought his fellows
and his foster-brothers, and took counsel with them what he should do in
this matter.  And they resolved to dispatch some of their number to go
and seek a maintenance for him.  Then Madawc offered him to become Master
of the Household and to have horses, and arms, and honour, and to fare
like as himself.  But Iorwerth refused this.

And Iorwerth made an inroad into Loegria, slaying the inhabitants, and
burning houses, and carrying away prisoners.  And Madawc took counsel
with the men of Powys, and they determined to place an hundred men in
each of the three Commots of Powys to seek for him.  And thus did they in
the plains of Powys from Aber Ceirawc, and in Allictwn Ver, and in Rhyd
Wilure, on the Vyrnwy, the three best Commots of Powys.  So he was none
the better, he nor his household, in Powys, nor in the plains thereof.
And they spread these men over the plains as far as Nillystwn Trevan.

Now one of the men who was upon this quest was called Rhonabwy.  And
Rhonabwy and Kynwrig Vrychgoch, a man of Mawddwy, and Cadwgan Vras, a man
of Moelvre in Kynlleith, came together to the house of Heilyn Goch the
son of Cadwgan the son of Iddon.  And when they came near to the house,
they saw an old hall, very black and having an upright gable, whence
issued a great smoke; and on entering, they found the floor full of
puddles and mounds; and it was difficult to stand thereon, so slippery
was it with the mire of cattle.  And where the puddles were, a man might
go up to his ankles in water and dirt.  And there were boughs of holly
spread over the floor, whereof the cattle had browsed the sprigs.  When
they came to the hall of the house, they beheld cells full of dust, and
very gloomy, and on one side an old hag making a fire.  And whenever she
felt cold, she cast a lapful of chaff upon the fire, and raised such a
smoke, that it was scarcely to be borne, as it rose up the nostrils.  And
on the other side was a yellow calf-skin on the floor; a main privilege
was it to any one who should get upon that hide.

And when they had sat down, they asked the hag where were the people of
the house.  And the hag spoke not, but muttered.  Thereupon behold the
people of the house entered; a ruddy, clownish, curly-headed man, with a
burthen of faggots on his back, and a pale slender woman, also carrying a
bundle under her arm.  And they barely welcomed the men, and kindled a
fire with the boughs.  And the woman cooked something, and gave them to
eat, barley bread, and cheese, and milk and water.

And there arose a storm of wind and rain, so that it was hardly possible
to go forth with safety.  And being weary with their journey, they laid
themselves down and sought to sleep.  And when they looked at the couch,
it seemed to be made but of a little coarse straw full of dust and
vermin, with the stems of boughs sticking up there-through, for the
cattle had eaten all the straw that was placed at the head and the foot.
And upon it was stretched an old russet-coloured rug, threadbare and
ragged; and a coarse sheet, full of slits, was upon the rug, and an
ill-stuffed pillow, and a worn-out cover upon the sheet.  And after much
suffering from the vermin, and from the discomfort of their couch, a
heavy sleep fell on Rhonabwy’s companions.  But Rhonabwy, not being able
either to sleep or to rest, thought he should suffer less if he went to
lie upon the yellow calf-skin that was stretched out on the floor.  And
there he slept.

As soon as sleep had come upon his eyes, it seemed to him that he was
journeying with his companions across the plain of Argyngroeg, and he
thought that he went towards Rhyd y Groes on the Severn.  As he
journeyed, he heard a mighty noise, the like whereof heard he never
before; and looking behind him, he beheld a youth with yellow curling
hair, and with his beard newly trimmed, mounted on a chestnut horse,
whereof the legs were grey from the top of the forelegs, and from the
bend of the hindlegs downwards.  And the rider wore a coat of yellow
satin sewn with green silk, and on his thigh was a gold-hilted sword,
with a scabbard of new leather of Cordova, belted with the skin of the
deer, and clasped with gold.  And over this was a scarf of yellow satin
wrought with green silk, the borders whereof were likewise green.  And
the green of the caparison of the horse, and of his rider, was as green
as the leaves of the fir-tree, and the yellow was as yellow as the
blossom of the broom.  So fierce was the aspect of the knight, that fear
seized upon them, and they began to flee.  And the knight pursued them.
And when the horse breathed forth, the men became distant from him, and
when he drew in his breath, they were drawn near to him, even to the
horse’s chest.  And when he had overtaken them, they besought his mercy.
“You have it gladly,” said he, “fear nought.”  “Ha, chieftain, since thou
hast mercy upon me, tell me also who thou art,” said Rhonabwy.  “I will
not conceal my lineage from thee, I am Iddawc the son of Mynyo, yet not
by my name, but by my nickname am I best known.”  “And wilt thou tell us
what thy nickname is?”  “I will tell you; it is Iddawc Cordd Prydain.”
“Ha, chieftain,” said Rhonabwy, “why art thou called thus?”  “I will tell
thee.  I was one of the messengers between Arthur and Medrawd his nephew,
at the battle of Camlan; and I was then a reckless youth, and through my
desire for battle, I kindled strife between them, and stirred up wrath,
when I was sent by Arthur the Emperor to reason with Medrawd, and to show
him, that he was his foster-father and his uncle, and to seek for peace,
lest the sons of the Kings of the Island of Britain, and of the nobles,
should be slain.  And whereas Arthur charged me with the fairest sayings
he could think of, I uttered unto Medrawd the harshest I could devise.
And therefore am I called Iddawc Cordd Prydain, for from this did the
battle of Camlan ensue.  And three nights before the end of the battle of
Camlan I left them, and went to the Llech Las in North Britain to do
penance.  And there I remained doing penance seven years, and after that
I gained pardon.”

Then lo! they heard a mighty sound which was much louder than that which
they had heard before, and when they looked round towards the sound, they
beheld a ruddy youth, without beard or whiskers, noble of mien, and
mounted on a stately courser.  And from the shoulders and the front of
the knees downwards the horse was bay.  And upon the man was a dress of
red satin wrought with yellow silk, and yellow were the borders of his
scarf.  And such parts of his apparel and of the trappings of his horse
as were yellow, as yellow were they as the blossom of the broom, and such
as were red, were as ruddy as the ruddiest blood in the world.

Then, behold the horseman overtook them, and he asked of Iddawc a share
of the little men that were with him.  “That which is fitting for me to
grant I will grant, and thou shalt be a companion to them as I have
been.”  And the horseman went away.  “Iddawc,” inquired Rhonabwy, “who
was that horseman?”  “Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of Prince Deorthach.”

And they journeyed over the plain of Argyngroeg as far as the ford of
Rhyd y Groes on the Severn.  And for a mile around the ford on both sides
of the road, they saw tents and encampments, and there was the clamour of
a mighty host.  And they came to the edge of the ford, and there they
beheld Arthur sitting on a flat island below the ford, having Bedwini the
Bishop on one side of him, and Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw on the other.
And a tall, auburn-haired youth stood before him, with his sheathed sword
in his hand, and clad in a coat and cap of jet-black satin.  And his face
was white as ivory, and his eyebrows black as jet, and such part of his
wrist as could be seen between his glove and his sleeve, was whiter than
the lily, and thicker than a warrior’s ankle.

Then came Iddawc and they that were with him, and stood before Arthur and
saluted him.  “Heaven grant thee good,” said Arthur.  “And where, Iddawc,
didst thou find these little men?”  “I found them, lord, up yonder on the
road.”  Then the Emperor smiled.  “Lord,” said Iddawc, “wherefore dost
thou laugh?”  “Iddawc,” replied Arthur, “I laugh not; but it pitieth me
that men of such stature as these should have this island in their
keeping, after the men that guarded it of yore.”  Then said Iddawc,
“Rhonabwy, dost thou see the ring with a stone set in it, that is upon
the Emperor’s hand?”  “I see it,” he answered.  “It is one of the
properties of that stone to enable thee to remember that thou seest here
to-night, and hadst thou not seen the stone, thou wouldest never have
been able to remember aught thereof.”

After this they saw a troop coming towards the ford.  “Iddawc,” inquired
Rhonabwy, “to whom does yonder troop belong?”  “They are the fellows of
Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of Prince Deorthach.  And these men are honourably
served with mead and bragget, and are freely beloved by the daughters of
the kings of the Island of Britain.  And this they merit, for they were
ever in the front and the rear in every peril.”  And he saw but one hue
upon the men and the horses of this troop, for they were all as red as
blood.  And when one of the knights rode forth from the troop, he looked
like a pillar of fire glancing athwart the sky.  And this troop encamped
above the ford.

Then they beheld another troop coming towards the ford, and these from
their horses’ chests upwards were whiter than the lily, and below blacker
than jet.  And they saw one of these knights go before the rest, and spur
his horse into the ford in such a manner that the water dashed over
Arthur and the Bishop, and those holding counsel with them, so that they
were as wet as if they had been drenched in the river.  And as he turned
the head of his horse, the youth who stood before Arthur struck the horse
over the nostrils with his sheathed sword, so that, had it been with the
bare blade, it would have been a marvel if the bone had not been wounded
as well as the flesh.  And the knight drew his sword half out of the
scabbard, and asked of him, “Wherefore didst thou strike my horse?
Whether was it in insult or in counsel unto me?”  “Thou dost indeed lack
counsel.  What madness caused thee to ride so furiously as to dash the
water of the ford over Arthur, and the consecrated Bishop, and their
counsellors, so that they were as wet as if they had been dragged out of
the river?”  “As counsel then will I take it.”  So he turned his horse’s
head round towards his army.

“Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “who was yonder knight?”  “The most eloquent and
the wisest youth that is in this island; Adaon, the son of Taliesin.”
“Who was the man that struck his horse?”  “A youth of froward nature;
Elphin, the son of Gwyddno.”

Then spake a tall and stately man, of noble and flowing speech, saying
that it was a marvel that so vast a host should be assembled in so narrow
a space, and that it was a still greater marvel that those should be
there at that time who had promised to be by mid-day in the battle of
Badon, fighting with Osla Gyllellvawr.  “Whether thou mayest choose to
proceed or not, I will proceed.”  “Thou sayest well,” said Arthur, “and
we will go altogether.”  “Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “who was the man who
spoke so marvellously unto Arthur erewhile?”  “A man who may speak as
boldly as he listeth, Caradawc Vreichvras, the son of Llyr Marini, his
chief counsellor and his cousin.”

Then Iddawc took Rhonabwy behind him on his horse, and that mighty host
moved forward, each troop in its order, towards Cevndigoll.  And when
they came to the middle of the ford of the Severn, Iddawc turned his
horse’s head, and Rhonabwy looked along the valley of the Severn.  And he
beheld two fair troops coming towards the ford.  One troop there came of
brilliant white, whereof every one of the men had a scarf of white satin
with jet-black borders.  And the knees and the tops of the shoulders of
their horses were jet-black, though they were of a pure white in every
other part.  And their banners were pure white, with black points to them
all.

“Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “who are yonder pure white troop?”  “They are
the men of Norway, and March the son of Meirchion is their prince.  And
he is cousin unto Arthur.”  And further on he saw a troop, whereof each
man wore garments of jet-black, with borders of pure white to every
scarf; and the tops of the shoulders and the knees of their horses were
pure white.  And their banners were jet-black with pure white at the
point of each.

“Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “who are the jet-black troop yonder?”  “They are
the men of Denmark, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd is their prince.”

And when they had overtaken the host, Arthur and his army of mighty ones
dismounted below Caer Badou, and he perceived that he and Iddawc
journeyed the same road as Arthur.  And after they had dismounted he
heard a great tumult and confusion amongst the host, and such as were
then at the flanks turned to the centre, and such as had been in the
centre moved to the flanks.  And then, behold, he saw a knight coming,
clad, both he and his horse, in mail, of which the rings were whiter than
the whitest lily, and the rivets redder than the ruddiest blood.  And he
rode amongst the host.

“Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “will yonder host flee?”  “King Arthur never
fled, and if this discourse of thine were heard, thou wert a lost man.
But as to the knight whom thou seest yonder, it is Kai.  The fairest
horseman is Kai in all Arthur’s Court; and the men who are at the front
of the army hasten to the rear to see Kai ride, and the men who are in
the centre flee to the side, from the shock of his horse.  And this is
the cause of the confusion of the host.”

Thereupon they heard a call made for Kadwr, Earl of Cornwall, and behold
he arose with the sword of Arthur in his hand.  And the similitude of two
serpents was upon the sword in gold.  And when the sword was drawn from
its scabbard, it seemed as if two flames of fire burst forth from the
jaws of the serpents, and then, so wonderful was the sword, that it was
hard for any one to look upon it.  And the host became still, and the
tumult ceased, and the Earl returned to the tent.

“Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “who is the man who bore the sword of Arthur?”
“Kadwr, the Earl of Cornwall, whose duty it is to arm the King on the
days of battle and warfare.”

And they heard a call made for Eirynwych Amheibyn, Arthur’s servant, a
red, rough, ill-favoured man, having red whiskers with bristly hairs.
And behold he came upon a tall red horse with the mane parted on each
side, and he brought with him a large and beautiful sumpter pack.  And
the huge red youth dismounted before Arthur, and he drew a golden chair
out of the pack, and a carpet of diapered satin.  And he spread the
carpet before Arthur, and there was an apple of ruddy gold at each corner
thereof, and he placed the chair upon the carpet.  And so large was the
chair that three armed warriors might have sat therein.  Gwenn was the
name of the carpet, and it was one of its properties that whoever was
upon it no one could see him, and he could see every one.  And it would
retain no colour but its own.

And Arthur sat within the carpet, and Owain the son of Urien was standing
before him.  “Owain,” said Arthur, “wilt thou play chess?”  “I will,
Lord,” said Owain.  And the red youth brought the chess for Arthur and
Owain; golden pieces and a board of silver.  And they began to play.

And while they were thus, and when they were best amused with their game,
behold they saw a white tent with a red canopy, and the figure of a
jet-black serpent on the top of the tent, and red glaring venomous eyes
in the head of the serpent, and a red flaming tongue.  And there came a
young page with yellow curling hair, and blue eyes, and a newly-springing
beard, wearing a coat and a surcoat of yellow satin, and hose of thin
greenish-yellow cloth upon his feet, and over his hose shoes of
parti-coloured leather, fastened at the insteps with golden clasps.  And
he bore a heavy three-edged sword with a golden hilt, in a scabbard of
black leather tipped with fine gold.  And he came to the place where the
Emperor and Owain were playing at chess.

And the youth saluted Owain.  And Owain marvelled that the youth should
salute him and should not have saluted the Emperor Arthur.  And Arthur
knew what was in Owain’s thought.  And he said to Owain, “Marvel not that
the youth salutes thee now, for he saluted me erewhile; and it is unto
thee that his errand is.”  Then said the youth unto Owain, “Lord, is it
with thy leave that the young pages and attendants of the Emperor harass
and torment and worry thy Ravens?  And if it be not with thy leave, cause
the Emperor to forbid them.”  “Lord,” said Owain, “thou hearest what the
youth says; if it seem good to thee, forbid them from my Ravens.”  “Play
thy game,” said he.  Then the youth returned to the tent.

That game did they finish, and another they began, and when they were in
the midst of the game, behold, a ruddy young man with auburn curling hair
and large eyes, well-grown, and having his beard new-shorn, came forth
from a bright yellow tent, upon the summit of which was the figure of a
bright red lion.  And he was clad in a coat of yellow satin, falling as
low as the small of his leg, and embroidered with threads of red silk.
And on his feet were hose of fine white buckram, and buskins of black
leather were over his hose, whereon were golden clasps.  And in his hand
a huge, heavy, three-edged sword, with a scabbard of red deer-hide,
tipped with gold.  And he came to the place where Arthur and Owain were
playing at chess.  And he saluted him.  And Owain was troubled at his
salutation, but Arthur minded it no more than before.  And the youth said
unto Owain, “Is it not against thy will that the attendants of the
Emperor harass thy Ravens, killing some and worrying others?  If against
thy will it be, beseech him to forbid them.”  “Lord,” said Owain, “forbid
thy men, if it seem good to thee.”  “Play thy game,” said the Emperor.
And the youth returned to the tent.

And that game was ended and another begun.  And as they were beginning
the first move of the game, they beheld at a small distance from them a
tent speckled yellow, the largest ever seen, and the figure of an eagle
of gold upon it, and a precious stone on the eagle’s head.  And coming
out of the tent, they saw a youth with thick yellow hair upon his head,
fair and comely, and a scarf of blue satin upon him, and a brooch of gold
in the scarf upon his right shoulder as large as a warrior’s middle
finger.  And upon his feet were hose of fine Totness, and shoes of
parti-coloured leather, clasped with gold, and the youth was of noble
bearing, fair of face, with ruddy cheeks and large hawk’s eyes.  In the
hand of the youth was a mighty lance, speckled yellow, with a
newly-sharpened head; and upon the lance a banner displayed.

Fiercely angry, and with rapid pace, came the youth to the place where
Arthur was playing at chess with Owain.  And they perceived that he was
wroth.  And thereupon he saluted Owain, and told him that his Ravens had
been killed, the chief part of them, and that such of them as were not
slain were so wounded and bruised that not one of them could raise its
wings a single fathom above the earth.  “Lord,” said Owain, “forbid thy
men.”  “Play,” said he, “if it please thee.”  Then said Owain to the
youth, “Go back, and wherever thou findest the strife at the thickest,
there lift up the banner, and let come what pleases Heaven.”

So the youth returned back to the place where the strife bore hardest
upon the Ravens, and he lifted up the banner; and as he did so they all
rose up in the air, wrathful and fierce and high of spirit, clapping
their wings in the wind, and shaking off the weariness that was upon
them.  And recovering their energy and courage, furiously and with
exultation did they, with one sweep, descend upon the heads of the men,
who had erewhile caused them anger and pain and damage, and they seized
some by the heads and others by the eyes, and some by the ears, and
others by the arms, and carried them up into the air; and in the air
there was a mighty tumult with the flapping of the wings of the
triumphant Ravens, and with their croaking; and there was another mighty
tumult with the groaning of the men, that were being torn and wounded,
and some of whom were slain.

And Arthur and Owain marvelled at the tumult as they played at chess;
and, looking, they perceived a knight upon a dun-coloured horse coming
towards them.  And marvellous was the hue of the dun horse.  Bright red
was his right shoulder, and from the top of his legs to the centre of his
hoof was bright yellow.  Both the knight and his horse were fully
equipped with heavy foreign armour.  The clothing of the horse from the
front opening upwards was of bright red sendal, and from thence opening
downwards was of bright yellow sendal.  A large gold-hilted one-edged
sword had the youth upon his thigh, in a scabbard of light blue, and
tipped with Spanish laton.  The belt of the sword was of dark green
leather with golden slides and a clasp of ivory upon it, and a buckle of
jet-black upon the clasp.  A helmet of gold was on the head of the
knight, set with precious stones of great virtue, and at the top of the
helmet was the image of a flame-coloured leopard with two ruby-red stones
in its head, so that it was astounding for a warrior, however stout his
heart, to look at the face of the leopard, much more at the face of the
knight.  He had in his hand a blue-shafted lance, but from the haft to
the point it was stained crimson-red with the blood of the Ravens and
their plumage.

The knight came to the place where Arthur and Owain were seated at chess.
And they perceived that he was harassed and vexed and weary as he came
towards them.  And the youth saluted Arthur, and told him that the Ravens
of Owain were slaying his young men and attendants.  And Arthur looked at
Owain and said, “Forbid thy Ravens.”  “Lord,” answered Owain, “play thy
game.”  And they played.  And the knight returned back towards the
strife, and the Ravens were not forbidden any more than before.

And when they had played awhile, they heard a mighty tumult, and a
wailing of men, and a croaking of Ravens, as they carried the men in
their strength into the air, and, tearing them betwixt them, let them
fall piecemeal to the earth.  And during the tumult they saw a knight
coming towards them, on a light grey horse, and the left foreleg of the
horse was jet-black to the centre of his hoof.  And the knight and the
horse were fully accoutred with huge heavy blue armour.  And a robe of
honour of yellow diapered satin was upon the knight, and the borders of
the robe were blue.  And the housings of the horse were jet-black, with
borders of bright yellow.  And on the thigh of the youth was a sword,
long, and three-edged, and heavy.  And the scabbard was of red cut
leather, and the belt of new red deer-skin, having upon it many golden
slides and a buckle of the bone of the sea-horse, the tongue of which was
jet-black.  A golden helmet was upon the head of the knight, wherein were
set sapphire-stones of great virtue.  And at the top of the helmet was
the figure of a flame-coloured lion, with a fiery-red tongue, issuing
above a foot from his mouth, and with venomous eyes, crimson-red, in his
head.  And the knight came, bearing in his hand a thick ashen lance, the
head whereof, which had been newly steeped in blood, was overlaid with
silver.

And the youth saluted the Emperor: “Lord,” said he, “carest thou not for
the slaying of thy pages, and thy young men, and the sons of the nobles
of the Island of Britain, whereby it will be difficult to defend this
island from henceforward for ever?”  “Owain,” said Arthur, “forbid thy
Ravens.”  “Play this game, Lord,” said Owain.

So they finished the game and began another; and as they were finishing
that game, lo, they heard a great tumult and a clamour of armed men, and
a croaking of Ravens, and a flapping of wings in the air, as they flung
down the armour entire to the ground, and the men and the horses
piecemeal.  Then they saw coming a knight on a lofty-headed piebald
horse.  And the left shoulder of the horse was of bright red, and its
right leg from the chest to the hollow of the hoof was pure white.  And
the knight and horse were equipped with arms of speckled yellow,
variegated with Spanish laton.  And there was a robe of honour upon him,
and upon his horse, divided in two parts, white and black, and the
borders of the robe of honour were of golden purple.  And above the robe
he wore a sword three-edged and bright, with a golden hilt.  And the belt
of the sword was of yellow goldwork, having a clasp upon it of the eyelid
of a black sea-horse, and a tongue of yellow gold to the clasp.  Upon the
head of the knight was a bright helmet of yellow laton, with sparkling
stones of crystal in it, and at the crest of the helmet was the figure of
a griffin, with a stone of many virtues in its head.  And he had an ashen
spear in his hand, with a round shaft, coloured with azure blue.  And the
head of the spear was newly stained with blood, and was overlaid with
fine silver.

Wrathfully came the knight to the place where Arthur was, and he told him
that the Ravens had slain his household and the sons of the chief men of
this island, and he besought him to cause Owain to forbid his Ravens.
And Arthur besought Owain to forbid them.  Then Arthur took the golden
chessmen that were upon the board, and crushed them until they became as
dust.  Then Owain ordered Gwres the son of Rheged to lower his banner.
So it was lowered, and all was peace.

Then Rhonabwy inquired of Iddawc who were the first three men that came
to Owain, to tell him his Ravens were being slain.  Said Iddawc, “They
were men who grieved that Owain should suffer loss, his fellow-chieftains
and companions, Selyv the son of Kynan Garwyn of Powys, and Gwgawn
Gleddyvrudd, and Gwres the son of Rheged, he who bears the banner in the
day of battle and strife.”  “Who,” said Rhonabwy, “were the last three
men who came to Arthur, and told him that the Ravens were slaughtering
his men?”  “The best of men,” said Iddawc, “and the bravest, and who
would grieve exceedingly that Arthur should have damage in aught;
Blathaon the son of Mawrheth, and Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of Prince
Deorthach, and Hyveidd Unllenn.”

And with that behold four-and-twenty knights came from Osla Gyllellvawr,
to crave a truce of Arthur for a fortnight and a month.  And Arthur rose
and went to take counsel.  And he came to where a tall, auburn,
curly-headed man was a little way off, and there he assembled his
counsellors.  Bedwini, the Bishop, and Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw, and
March the son of Meirchawn, and Caradawc Vreichvras, and Gwalchmai the
son of Gwyar, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd, and Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of
Prince Deorthach, and Rhiogan the son of the King of Ireland, and
Gwenwynwyn the son of Nav, Howel the son of Emyr Llydaw, Gwilym the son
of Rhwyf Freinc, and Daned the son of Ath, and Goreu Custennin, and Mabon
the son of Modron, and Peredur Paladyr Hir, and Hyveidd Unllenn, and
Twrch the son of Perif, and Nerth the son of Kadarn, and Gobrwy the son
of Echel Vorddwyttwll, Gwair the son of Gwestyl, and Gadwy the son of
Geraint, Trystan the son of Tallwch, Moryen Manawc, Granwen the son of
Llyr, and Llacheu the son of Arthur, and Llawvrodedd Varvawc, and Kadwr
Earl of Cornwall, Morvran the son of Tegid, and Rhyawd the son of
Morgant, and Dyvyr the son of Alun Dyved, Gwrhyr Gwalstawd Ieithoedd,
Adaon the son of Taliesin, Llary the son of Kasnar Wledig, and Fflewddur
Fflam, and Greidawl Galldovydd, Gilbert the son of Kadgyffro, Menw the
son of Teirgwaedd, Gwrthmwl Wledig, Cawrdav the son of Caradawc
Vreichvras, Gildas the son of Kaw, Kadyriaith the son of Saidi, and many
of the men of Norway and Denmark, and many of the men of Greece, and a
crowd of the men of the host came to that council.

“Iddawc,” said Rhonabwy, “who was the auburn haired man to whom they came
just now?”  “Rhun the son of Maelgwn Gwynedd, a man whose prerogative it
is, that he may join in counsel with all.”  “And wherefore did they admit
into counsel with men of such dignity as are yonder a stripling so young
as Kadyriaith the son of Saidi?”  “Because there is not throughout
Britain a man better skilled in counsel than he.”

Thereupon, behold, bards came and recited verses before Arthur, and no
man understood those verses but Kadyriaith only, save that they were in
Arthur’s praise.

And lo, there came four-and-twenty asses with their burdens of gold and
of silver, and a tired way-worn man with each of them, bringing tribute
to Arthur from the Islands of Greece.  Then Kadyriaith the son of Saidi
besought that a truce might be granted to Osla Gyllellvawr for the space
of a fortnight and a month, and that the asses and the burdens they
carried might be given to the bards, to be to them as the reward for
their stay and that their verse might be recompensed during the time of
the truce.  And thus it was settled.

“Rhonabwy,” said Iddawc, “would it not be wrong to forbid a youth who can
give counsel so liberal as this from coming to the councils of his Lord?”

Then Kai arose, and he said, “Whosoever will follow Arthur, let him be
with him to-night in Cornwall, and whosoever will not, let him be opposed
to Arthur even during the truce.”  And through the greatness of the
tumult that ensued, Rhonabwy awoke.  And when he awoke he was upon the
yellow calf-skin, having slept three nights and three days.

And this tale is called the Dream of Rhonabwy.  And this is the reason
that no one knows the dream without a book, neither bard nor gifted seer;
because of the various colours that were upon the horses, and the many
wondrous colours of the arms and of the panoply, and of the precious
scarfs, and of the virtue-bearing stones.




PWYLL PRINCE OF DYVED


PWYLL PRINCE OF DYVED was lord of the seven Cantrevs of Dyved; and once
upon a time he was at Narberth his chief palace, and he was minded to go
and hunt, and the part of his dominions in which it pleased him to hunt
was Glyn Cuch.  So he set forth from Narbeth that night, and went as far
as Llwyn Diarwyd.  And that night he tarried there, and early on the
morrow he rose and came to Glyn Cuch, when he let loose the dogs in the
wood, and sounded the horn, and began the chase.  And as he followed the
dogs, he lost his companions; and whilst he listened to the hounds, he
heard the cry of other hounds, a cry different from his own, and coming
in the opposite direction.

And he beheld a glade in the wood forming a level plain, and as his dogs
came to the edge of the glade, he saw a stag before the other dogs.  And
lo, as it reached the middle of the glade, the dogs that followed the
stag overtook it and brought it down.  Then looked he at the colour of
the dogs, staying not to look at the stag, and of all the hounds that he
had seen in the world, he had never seen any that were like unto these.
For their hair was of a brilliant shining white, and their ears were red;
and as the whiteness of their bodies shone, so did the redness of their
ears glisten.  And he came towards the dogs, and drove away those that
had brought down the stag, and set his own dogs upon it.

And as he was setting on his dogs he saw a horseman coming towards him
upon a large light-grey steed, with a hunting horn round his neck, and
clad in garments of grey woollen in the fashion of a hunting garb.  And
the horseman drew near and spoke unto him thus.  “Chieftain,” said he, “I
know who thou art, and I greet thee not.”  “Peradventure,” said Pwyll,
“thou art of such dignity that thou shouldest not do so.”  “Verily,”
answered he, “it is not my dignity that prevents me.”  “What is it then,
O Chieftain?” asked he.  “By Heaven, it is by reason of thine own
ignorance and want of courtesy.”  “What discourtesy, Chieftain, hast thou
seen in me?”  “Greater discourtesy saw I never in man,” said he, “than to
drive away the dogs that were killing the stag and to set upon it thine
own.  This was discourteous, and though I may not be revenged upon thee,
yet I declare to Heaven that I will do thee more dishonour than the value
of an hundred stags.”  “O Chieftain,” he replied, “if I have done ill I
will redeem thy friendship.”  “How wilt thou redeem it?”  “According as
thy dignity may be, but I know not who thou art?”  “A crowned king am I
in the land whence I come.”  “Lord,” said he, “may the day prosper with
thee, and from what land comest thou?”  “From Annwvyn,” {2} answered he;
“Arawn, a King of Annwvyn, am I.”  “Lord,” said he, “how may I gain thy
friendship?”  “After this manner mayest thou,” he said.  “There is a man
whose dominions are opposite to mine, who is ever warring against me, and
he is Havgan, a King of Annwvyn, and by ridding me of this oppression,
which thou canst easily do, shalt thou gain my friendship.”  “Gladly will
I do this,” said he.  “Show me how I may.”  “I will show thee.  Behold
thus it is thou mayest.  I will make firm friendship with thee; and this
will I do.  I will send thee to Annwvyn in my stead, and I will give thee
the fairest lady thou didst ever behold to be thy companion, and I will
put my form and semblance upon thee, so that not a page of the chamber,
nor an officer, nor any other man that has always followed me shall know
that it is not I.  And this shall be for the space of a year from
to-morrow, and then we will meet in this place.”  “Yes,” said he; “but
when I shall have been there for the space of a year, by what means shall
I discover him of whom thou speakest?”  “One year from this night,” he
answered, “is the time fixed between him and me that we should meet at
the Ford; be thou there in my likeness, and with one stroke that thou
givest him, he shall no longer live.  And if he ask thee to give him
another, give it not, how much soever he may entreat thee, for when I did
so, he fought with me next day as well as ever before.”  “Verily,” said
Pwyll, “what shall I do concerning my kingdom?”  Said Arawn, “I will
cause that no one in all thy dominions, neither man nor woman, shall know
that I am not thou, and I will go there in thy stead.”  “Gladly then,”
said Pwyll, “will I set forward.”  “Clear shall be thy path, and nothing
shall detain thee, until thou come into my dominions, and I myself will
be thy guide!”

So he conducted him until he came in sight of the palace and its
dwellings.  “Behold,” said he, “the Court and the kingdom in thy power.
Enter the Court, there is no one there who will know thee, and when thou
seest what service is done there, thou wilt know the customs of the
Court.”

So he went forward to the Court, and when he came there, he beheld
sleeping-rooms, and halls, and chambers, and the most beautiful buildings
ever seen.  And he went into the hall to disarray, and there came youths
and pages and disarrayed him, and all as they entered saluted him.  And
two knights came and drew his hunting-dress from about him, and clothed
him in a vesture of silk and gold.  And the hall was prepared, and behold
he saw the household and the host enter in, and the host was the most
comely and the best equipped that he had ever seen.  And with them came
in likewise the Queen, who was the fairest woman that he had ever yet
beheld.  And she had on a yellow robe of shining satin; and they washed
and went to the table, and sat, the Queen upon one side of him, and one
who seemed to be an Earl on the other side.

And he began to speak with the Queen, and he thought, from her speech,
that she was the seemliest and most noble lady of converse and of cheer
that ever was.  And they partook of meat, and drink, with songs and with
feasting; and of all the Courts upon the earth, behold this was the best
supplied with food and drink, and vessels of gold and royal jewels.

                                * * * * *

And the year he spent in hunting, and minstrelsy, and feasting, and
diversions, and discourse with his companions until the night that was
fixed for the conflict.  And when that night came, it was remembered even
by those who lived in the furthest part of his dominions, and he went to
the meeting, and the nobles of the kingdom with him.  And when he came to
the Ford, a knight arose and spake thus.  “Lords,” said he, “listen well.
It is between two kings that this meeting is, and between them only.
Each claimeth of the other his land and territory, and do all of you
stand aside and leave the fight to be between them.”

Thereupon the two kings approached each other in the middle of the Ford,
and encountered, and at the first thrust, the man who was in the stead of
Arawn struck Havgan on the centre of the boss of his shield, so that it
was cloven in twain, and his armour was broken, and Havgan himself was
borne to the ground an arm’s and a spear’s length over the crupper of his
horse, and he received a deadly blow.  “O Chieftain,” said Havgan, “what
right hast thou to cause my death?  I was not injuring thee in anything,
and I know not wherefore thou wouldest slay me.  But, for the love of
Heaven, since thou hast begun to slay me, complete thy work.”  “Ah,
Chieftain,” he replied, “I may yet repent doing that unto thee, slay thee
who may, I will not do so.”  “My trusty Lords,” said Havgan, “bear me
hence.  My death has come.  I shall be no more able to uphold you.”  “My
Nobles,” also said he who was in the semblance of Arawn, “take counsel
and know who ought to be my subjects.”  “Lord,” said the Nobles, “all
should be, for there is no king over the whole of Annwvyn but thee.”
“Yes,” he replied, “it is right that he who comes humbly should be
received graciously, but he that doth not come with obedience, shall be
compelled by the force of swords.”  And thereupon he received the homage
of the men, and he began to conquer the country; and the next day by noon
the two kingdoms were in his power.  And thereupon he went to keep his
tryst, and came to Glyn Cuch.

And when he came there, the King of Annwvyn was there to meet him, and
each of them was rejoiced to see the other.  “Verily,” said Arawn, “may
Heaven reward thee for thy friendship towards me.  I have heard of it.
When thou comest thyself to thy dominions,” said he, “thou wilt see that
which I have done for thee.”  “Whatever thou hast done for me, may Heaven
repay it thee.”

Then Arawn gave to Pwyll Prince of Dyved his proper form and semblance,
and he himself took his own; and Arawn set forth towards the Court of
Annwvyn; and he was rejoiced when he beheld his hosts, and his household,
whom he had not seen so long; but they had not known of his absence, and
wondered no more at his coming than usual.  And that day was spent in joy
and merriment; and he sat and conversed with his wife and his nobles.
And when it was time for them rather to sleep than to carouse, they went
to rest.

                                * * * * *

Pwyll Prince of Dyved came likewise to his country and dominions, and
began to inquire of the nobles of the land, how his rule had been during
the past year, compared with what it had been before.  “Lord,” said they,
“thy wisdom was never so great, and thou wast never so kind or so free in
bestowing thy gifts, and thy justice was never more worthily seen than in
this year.”  “By Heaven,” said he, “for all the good you have enjoyed,
you should thank him who hath been with you; for behold, thus hath this
matter been.”  And thereupon Pwyll related the whole unto them.  “Verily,
Lord,” said they, “render thanks unto Heaven that thou hast such a
fellowship, and withhold not from us the rule which we have enjoyed for
this year past.”  “I take Heaven to witness that I will not withhold it,”
answered Pwyll.

And thenceforth they made strong the friendship that was between them,
and each sent unto the other horses, and greyhounds, and hawks, and all
such jewels as they thought would be pleasing to each other.  And by
reason of his having dwelt that year in Annwvyn, and having ruled there
so prosperously, and united the two kingdoms in one day by his valour and
prowess, he lost the name of Pwyll Prince of Dyved, and was called Pwyll
Chief of Annwvyn from that time forward.

                                * * * * *

Once upon a time, Pwyll was at Narberth his chief palace, where a feast
had been prepared for him, and with him was a great host of men.  And
after the first meal, Pwyll arose to walk, and he went to the top of a
mound that was above the palace, and was called Gorsedd Arberth.  “Lord,”
said one of the Court, “it is peculiar to the mound that whosoever sits
upon it cannot go thence, without either receiving wounds or blows, or
else seeing a wonder.”  “I fear not to receive wounds and blows in the
midst of such a host as this, but as to the wonder, gladly would I see
it.  I will go therefore and sit upon the mound.”

And upon the mound he sat.  And while he sat there, they saw a lady, on a
pure white horse of large size, with a garment of shining gold around
her, coming along the highway that led from the mound; and the horse
seemed to move at a slow and even pace, and to be coming up towards the
mound.  “My men,” said Pwyll, “is there any among you who knows yonder
lady?”  “There is not, Lord,” said they.  “Go one of you and meet her,
that we may know who she is.”  And one of them arose, and as he came upon
the road to meet her, she passed by, and he followed as fast as he could,
being on foot; and the greater was his speed, the further was she from
him.  And when he saw that it profited him nothing to follow her, he
returned to Pwyll, and said unto him, “Lord, it is idle for any one in
the world to follow her on foot.”  “Verily,” said Pwyll, “go unto the
palace, and take the fleetest horse that thou seest, and go after her.”

And he took a horse and went forward.  And he came to an open level
plain, and put spurs to his horse; and the more he urged his horse, the
further was she from him.  Yet she held the same pace as at first.  And
his horse began to fail; and when his horse’s feet failed him, he
returned to the place where Pwyll was.  “Lord,” said he, “it will avail
nothing for any one to follow yonder lady.  I know of no horse in these
realms swifter than this, and it availed me not to pursue her.”  “Of a
truth,” said Pwyll, “there must be some illusion here.  Let us go towards
the palace.”  So to the palace they went, and they spent that day.  And
the next day they arose, and that also they spent until it was time to go
to meat.  And after the first meal, “Verily,” said Pwyll, “we will go the
same party as yesterday to the top of the mound.  And do thou,” said he
to one of his young men, “take the swiftest horse that thou knowest in
the field.”  And thus did the young man.  And they went towards the
mound, taking the horse with them.  And as they were sitting down they
beheld the lady on the same horse, and in the same apparel, coming along
the same road.  “Behold,” said Pwyll, “here is the lady of yesterday.
Make ready, youth, to learn who she is.”  “My lord,” said he, “that will
I gladly do.”  And thereupon the lady came opposite to them.  So the
youth mounted his horse; and before he had settled himself in his saddle,
she passed by, and there was a clear space between them.  But her speed
was no greater than it had been the day before.  Then he put his horse
into an amble, and thought that notwithstanding the gentle pace at which
his horse went, he should soon overtake her.  But this availed him not;
so he gave his horse the reins.  And still he came no nearer to her than
when he went at a foot’s pace.  And the more he urged his horse, the
further was she from him.  Yet she rode not faster than before.  When he
saw that it availed not to follow her, he returned to the place where
Pwyll was.  “Lord,” said he, “the horse can no more than thou hast seen.”
“I see indeed that it avails not that any one should follow her.  And by
Heaven,” said he, “she must needs have an errand to some one in this
plain, if her haste would allow her to declare it.  Let us go back to the
palace.”  And to the palace they went, and they spent that night in songs
and feasting, as it pleased them.

And the next day they amused themselves until it was time to go to meat.
And when meat was ended, Pwyll said, “Where are the hosts that went
yesterday and the day before to the top of the mound?”  “Behold, Lord, we
are here,” said they.  “Let us go,” said he, “to the mound, to sit there.
And do thou,” said he to the page who tended his horse, “saddle my horse
well, and hasten with him to the road, and bring also my spurs with
thee.”  And the youth did thus.  And they went and sat upon the mound;
and ere they had been there but a short time, they beheld the lady coming
by the same road, and in the same manner, and at the same pace.  “Young
man,” said Pwyll, “I see the lady coming; give me my horse.”  And no
sooner had he mounted his horse than she passed him.  And he turned after
her and followed her.  And he let his horse go bounding playfully, and
thought that at the second step or the third he should come up with her.
But he came no nearer to her than at first.  Then he urged his horse to
his utmost speed, yet he found that it availed nothing to follow her.
Then said Pwyll, “O maiden, for the sake of him whom thou best lovest,
stay for me.”  “I will stay gladly,” said she, “and it were better for
thy horse hadst thou asked it long since.”  So the maiden stopped, and
she threw back that part of her headdress which covered her face.  And
she fixed her eyes upon him, and began to talk with him.  “Lady,” asked
he, “whence comest thou, and whereunto dost thou journey?”  “I journey on
mine own errand,” said she, “and right glad am I to see thee.”  “My
greeting be unto thee,” said he.  Then he thought that the beauty of all
the maidens, and all the ladies that he had ever seen, was as nothing
compared to her beauty.  “Lady,” he said, “wilt thou tell me aught
concerning thy purpose?”  “I will tell thee,” said she.  “My chief quest
was to seek thee.”  “Behold,” said Pwyll, “this is to me the most
pleasing quest on which thou couldst have come; and wilt thou tell me who
thou art?”  “I will tell thee, Lord,” said she.  “I am Rhiannon, the
daughter of Heveydd Hên, and they sought to give me to a husband against
my will.  But no husband would I have, and that because of my love for
thee, neither will I yet have one unless thou reject me.  And hither have
I come to hear thy answer.”  “By Heaven,” said Pwyll, “behold this is my
answer.  If I might choose among all the ladies and damsels in the world,
thee would I choose.”  “Verily,” said she, “if thou art thus minded, make
a pledge to meet me ere I am given to another.”  “The sooner I may do so,
the more pleasing will it be unto me,” said Pwyll, “and wheresoever thou
wilt, there will I meet with thee.”  “I will that thou meet me this day
twelvemonth at the palace of Heveydd.  And I will cause a feast to be
prepared, so that it be ready against thou come.”  “Gladly,” said he,
“will I keep this tryst.”  “Lord,” said she, “remain in health, and be
mindful that thou keep thy promise; and now I will go hence.”  So they
parted, and he went back to his hosts and to them of his household.  And
whatsoever questions they asked him respecting the damsel, he always
turned the discourse upon other matters.  And when a year from that time
was gone, he caused a hundred knights to equip themselves and to go with
him to the palace of Heveydd Hên.  And he came to the palace, and there
was great joy concerning him, with much concourse of people and great
rejoicing, and vast preparations for his coming.  And the whole Court was
placed under his orders.

And the hall was garnished and they went to meat, and thus did they sit;
Heveydd Hên was on one side of Pwyll, and Rhiannon on the other.  And all
the rest according to their rank.  And they ate and feasted and talked
one with another, and at the beginning of the carousal after the meat,
there entered a tall auburn-haired youth, of royal bearing, clothed in a
garment of satin.  And when he came into the hall, he saluted Pwyll and
his companions.  “The greeting of Heaven be unto thee, my soul,” said
Pwyll, “come thou and sit down.”  “Nay,” said he, “a suitor am I, and I
will do mine errand.”  “Do so willingly,” said Pwyll.  “Lord,” said he,
“my errand is unto thee, and it is to crave a boon of thee that I come.”
“What boon soever thou mayest ask of me, as far as I am able, thou shalt
have.”  “Ah,” said Rhiannon, “wherefore didst thou give that answer?”
“Has he not given it before the presence of these nobles?” asked the
youth.  “My soul,” said Pwyll, “what is the boon thou askest?”  “The lady
whom best I love is to be thy bride this night; I come to ask her of
thee, with the feast and the banquet that are in this place.”  And Pwyll
was silent because of the answer which he had given.  “Be silent as long
as thou wilt,” said Rhiannon.  “Never did man make worse use of his wits
than thou hast done.”  “Lady,” said he, “I knew not who he was.”  “Behold
this is the man to whom they would have given me against my will,” said
she.  “And he is Gwawl the son of Clud, a man of great power and wealth,
and because of the word thou hast spoken, bestow me upon him lest shame
befall thee.”  “Lady,” said he, “I understand not thine answer.  Never
can I do as thou sayest.”  “Bestow me upon him,” said she, “and I will
cause that I shall never be his.”  “By what means will that be?” asked
Pwyll.  “In thy hand will I give thee a small bag,” said she.  “See that
thou keep it well, and he will ask of thee the banquet, and the feast,
and the preparations which are not in thy power.  Unto the hosts and the
household will I give the feast.  And such will be thy answer respecting
this.  And as concerns myself, I will engage to become his bride this
night twelvemonth.  And at the end of the year be thou here,” said she,
“and bring this bag with thee, and let thy hundred knights be in the
orchard up yonder.  And when he is in the midst of joy and feasting, come
thou in by thyself, clad in ragged garments, and holding thy bag in thy
hand, and ask nothing but a bagful of food, and I will cause that if all
the meat and liquor that are in these seven Cantrevs were put into it, it
would be no fuller than before.  And after a great deal has been put
therein, he will ask thee whether thy bag will ever be full.  Say thou
then that it never will, until a man of noble birth and of great wealth
arise and press the food in the bag with both his feet, saying, ‘Enough
has been put therein;’ and I will cause him to go and tread down the food
in the bag, and when he does so, turn thou the bag, so that he shall be
up over his head in it, and then slip a knot upon the thongs of the bag.
Let there be also a good bugle horn about thy neck, and as soon as thou
hast bound him in the bag, wind thy horn, and let it be a signal between
thee and thy knights.  And when they hear the sound of the horn, let them
come down upon the palace.”  “Lord,” said Gwawl, “it is meet that I have
an answer to my request.”  “As much of that thou hast asked as it is in
my power to give, thou shalt have,” replied Pwyll.  “My soul,” said
Rhiannon unto him, “as for the feast and the banquet that are here, I
have bestowed them upon the men of Dyved, and the household, and the
warriors that are with us.  These can I not suffer to be given to any.
In a year from to-night a banquet shall be prepared for thee in this
palace, that I may become thy bride.”

So Gwawl went forth to his possessions, and Pwyll went also back to
Dyved.  And they both spent that year until it was the time for the feast
at the palace of Heveydd Hên.  Then Gwawl the son of Clud set out to the
feast that was prepared for him, and he came to the palace, and was
received there with rejoicing.  Pwyll, also, the Chief of Annwvyn, came
to the orchard with his hundred knights, as Rhiannon had commanded him,
having the bag with him.  And Pwyll was clad in coarse and ragged
garments, and wore large clumsy old shoes upon his feet.  And when he
knew that the carousal after the meat had begun, he went towards the
hall, and when he came into the hall, he saluted Gwawl the son of Clud,
and his company, both men and women.  “Heaven prosper thee,” said Gwawl,
“and the greeting of Heaven be unto thee.”  “Lord,” said he, “may Heaven
reward thee, I have an errand unto thee.”  “Welcome be thine errand, and
if thou ask of me that which is just, thou shalt have it gladly.”  “It is
fitting,” answered he.  “I crave but from want, and the boon that I ask
is to have this small bag that thou seest filled with meat.”  “A request
within reason is this,” said he, “and gladly shalt thou have it.  Bring
him food.”  A great number of attendants arose and began to fill the bag,
but for all that they put into it, it was no fuller than at first.  “My
soul,” said Gwawl, “will thy bag be ever full?”  “It will not, I declare
to Heaven,” said he, “for all that may be put into it, unless one
possessed of lands, and domains, and treasure, shall arise and tread down
with both his feet the food that is within the bag, and shall say,
‘Enough has been put therein.’”  Then said Rhiannon unto Gwawl the son of
Clud, “Rise up quickly.”  “I will willingly arise,” said he.  So he rose
up, and put his two feet into the bag.  And Pwyll turned up the sides of
the bag, so that Gwawl was over his head in it.  And he shut it up
quickly and slipped a knot upon the thongs, and blew his horn.  And
thereupon behold his household came down upon the palace.  And they
seized all the host that had come with Gwawl, and cast them into his own
prison.  And Pwyll threw off his rags, and his old shoes, and his
tattered array; and as they came in, every one of Pwyll’s knights struck
a blow upon the bag, and asked, “What is here?”  “A Badger,” said they.
And in this manner they played, each of them striking the bag, either
with his foot or with a staff.  And thus played they with the bag.  Every
one as he came in asked, “What game are you playing at thus?”  “The game
of Badger in the Bag,” said they.  And then was the game of Badger in the
Bag first played.

“Lord,” said the man in the bag, “if thou wouldest but hear me, I merit
not to be slain in a bag.”  Said Heveydd Hên, “Lord, he speaks truth.  It
were fitting that thou listen to him, for he deserves not this.”
“Verily,” said Pwyll, “I will do thy counsel concerning him.”  “Behold
this is my counsel then,” said Rhiannon; “thou art now in a position in
which it behoves thee to satisfy suitors and minstrels; let him give unto
them in thy stead, and take a pledge from him that he will never seek to
revenge that which has been done to him.  And this will be punishment
enough.”  “I will do this gladly,” said the man in the bag.  “And gladly
will I accept it,” said Pwyll, “since it is the counsel of Heveydd and
Rhiannon.”  “Such then is our counsel,” answered they.  “I accept it,”
said Pwyll.  “Seek thyself sureties.”  “We will be for him,” said
Heveydd, “until his men be free to answer for him.”  And upon this he was
let out of the bag, and his liegemen were liberated.  “Demand now of
Gwawl his sureties,” said Heveydd, “we know which should be taken for
him.”  And Heveydd numbered the sureties.  Said Gwawl, “Do thou thyself
draw up the covenant.”  “It will suffice me that it be as Rhiannon said,”
answered Pwyll.  So unto that covenant were the sureties pledged.
“Verily, Lord,” said Gwawl, “I am greatly hurt, and I have many bruises.
I have need to be anointed; with thy leave I will go forth.  I will leave
nobles in my stead, to answer for me in all that thou shalt require.”
“Willingly,” said Pwyll, “mayest thou do thus.”  So Gwawl went towards
his own possessions.

And the hall was set in order for Pwyll and the men of his host, and for
them also of the palace, and they went to the tables and sat down.  And
as they had sat that time twelvemonth, so sat they that night.  And they
ate, and feasted, and spent the night in mirth and tranquillity.  And the
time came that they should sleep, and Pwyll and Rhiannon went to their
chamber.

And next morning at the break of day, “My Lord,” said Rhiannon, “arise
and begin to give thy gifts unto the minstrels.  Refuse no one to-day
that may claim thy bounty.”  “Thus shall it be gladly,” said Pwyll, “both
to-day and every day while the feast shall last.”  So Pwyll arose, and he
caused silence to be proclaimed, and desired all the suitors and the
minstrels to show and to point out what gifts were to their wish and
desire.  And this being done, the feast went on, and he denied no one
while it lasted.  And when the feast was ended, Pwyll said unto Heveydd,
“My Lord, with thy permission I will set out for Dyved to-morrow.”
“Certainly,” said Heveydd, “may Heaven prosper thee.  Fix also a time
when Rhiannon may follow thee.”  “By Heaven,” said Pwyll, “we will go
hence together.”  “Willest thou this, Lord?” said Heveydd.  “Yes, by
Heaven,” answered Pwyll.

And the next day, they set forward towards Dyved, and journeyed to the
palace of Narberth, where a feast was made ready for them.  And there
came to them great numbers of the chief men and the most noble ladies of
the land, and of these there was none to whom Rhiannon did not give some
rich gift, either a bracelet, or a ring, or a precious stone.  And they
ruled the land prosperously both that year and the next.

And in the third year the nobles of the land began to be sorrowful at
seeing a man whom they loved so much, and who was moreover their lord and
their foster-brother, without an heir.  And they came to him.  And the
place where they met was Preseleu, in Dyved.  “Lord,” said they, “we know
that thou art not so young as some of the men of this country, and we
fear that thou mayest not have an heir of the wife whom thou hast taken.
Take therefore another wife of whom thou mayest have heirs.  Thou canst
not always continue with us, and though thou desire to remain as thou
art, we will not suffer thee.”  “Truly,” said Pwyll, “we have not long
been joined together, and many things may yet befall.  Grant me a year
from this time, and for the space of a year we will abide together, and
after that I will do according to your wishes.”  So they granted it.  And
before the end of a year a son was born unto him.  And in Narberth was he
born; and on the night that he was born, women were brought to watch the
mother and the boy.  And the women slept, as did also Rhiannon, the
mother of the boy.  And the number of the women that were brought into
the chamber was six.  And they watched for a good portion of the night,
and before midnight every one of them fell asleep, and towards break of
day they awoke; and when they awoke, they looked where they had put the
boy, and behold he was not there.  “Oh,” said one of the women, “the boy
is lost?”  “Yes,” said another, “and it will be small vengeance if we are
burnt or put to death because of the child.”  Said one of the women, “Is
there any counsel for us in the world in this matter?”  “There is,”
answered another, “I offer you good counsel.”  “What is that?” asked
they.  “There is here a stag-hound bitch, and she has a litter of whelps.
Let us kill some of the cubs, and rub the blood on the face and hands of
Rhiannon, and lay the bones before her, and assert that she herself hath
devoured her son, and she alone will not be able to gainsay us six.”  And
according to this counsel it was settled.  And towards morning Rhiannon
awoke, and she said, “Women, where is my son?”  “Lady,” said they, “ask
us not concerning thy son, we have nought but the blows and the bruises
we got by struggling with thee, and of a truth we never saw any woman so
violent as thou, for it was of no avail to contend with thee.  Hast thou
not thyself devoured thy son?  Claim him not therefore of us.”  “For
pity’s sake,” said Rhiannon; “the Lord God knows all things.  Charge me
not falsely.  If you tell me this from fear, I assert before Heaven that
I will defend you.”  “Truly,” said they, “we would not bring evil on
ourselves for any one in the world.”  “For pity’s sake,” said Rhiannon,
“you will receive no evil by telling the truth.”  But for all her words,
whether fair or harsh, she received but the same answer from the women.

And Pwyll the chief of Annwvyn arose, and his household, and his hosts.
And this occurrence could not be concealed, but the story went forth
throughout the land, and all the nobles heard it.  Then the nobles came
to Pwyll, and besought him to put away his wife, because of the great
crime which she had done.  But Pwyll answered them, that they had no
cause wherefore they might ask him to put away his wife, save for her
having no children.  “But children has she now had, therefore will I not
put her away; if she has done wrong, let her do penance for it.”

So Rhiannon sent for the teachers and the wise men, and as she preferred
doing penance to contending with the women, she took upon her a penance.
And the penance that was imposed upon her was, that she should remain in
that palace of Narberth until the end of seven years, and that she should
sit every day near unto a horseblock that was without the gate.  And that
she should relate the story to all who should come there, whom she might
suppose not to know it already; and that she should offer the guests and
strangers, if they would permit her, to carry them upon her back into the
palace.  But it rarely happened that any would permit.  And thus did she
spend part of the year.

Now at that time Teirnyon Twryv Vliant was Lord of Gwent Is Coed, and he
was the best man in the world.  And unto his house there belonged a mare,
than which neither mare nor horse in the kingdom was more beautiful.  And
on the night of every first of May she foaled, and no one ever knew what
became of the colt.  And one night Teirnyon talked with his wife: “Wife,”
said he, “it is very simple of us that our mare should foal every year,
and that we should have none of her colts.”  “What can be done in the
matter?” said she.  “This is the night of the first of May,” said he.
“The vengeance of Heaven be upon me, if I learn not what it is that takes
away the colts.”  So he caused the mare to be brought into a house, and
he armed himself, and began to watch that night.  And in the beginning of
the night, the mare foaled a large and beautiful colt.  And it was
standing up in the place.  And Teirnyon rose up and looked at the size of
the colt, and as he did so he heard a great tumult, and after the tumult
behold a claw came through the window into the house, and it seized the
colt by the mane.  Then Teirnyon drew his sword, and struck off the arm
at the elbow, so that portion of the arm together with the colt was in
the house with him.  And then did he hear a tumult and wailing, both at
once.  And he opened the door, and rushed out in the direction of the
noise, and he could not see the cause of the tumult because of the
darkness of the night, but he rushed after it and followed it.  Then he
remembered that he had left the door open, and he returned.  And at the
door behold there was an infant boy in swaddling-clothes, wrapped around
in a mantle of satin.  And he took up the boy, and behold he was very
strong for the age that he was of.

Then he shut the door, and went into the chamber where his wife was.
“Lady,” said he, “art thou sleeping?”  “No, lord,” said she, “I was
asleep, but as thou camest in I did awake.”  “Behold, here is a boy for
thee if thou wilt,” said he, “since thou hast never had one.”  “My lord,”
said she, “what adventure is this?”  “It was thus,” said Teirnyon; and he
told her how it all befell.  “Verily, lord,” said she, “what sort of
garments are there upon the boy?”  “A mantle of satin,” said he.  “He is
then a boy of gentle lineage,” she replied.  “My lord,” she said, “if
thou wilt, I shall have great diversion and mirth.  I will call my women
unto me, and tell them that I have been pregnant.”  “I will readily grant
thee to do this,” he answered.  And thus did they, and they caused the
boy to be baptized, and the ceremony was performed there; and the name
which they gave unto him was Gwri Wallt Euryn, because what hair was upon
his head was as yellow as gold.  And they had the boy nursed in the Court
until he was a year old.  And before the year was over he could walk
stoutly.  And he was larger than a boy of three years old, even one of
great growth and size.  And the boy was nursed the second year, and then
he was as large as a child six years old.  And before the end of the
fourth year, he would bribe the grooms to allow him to take the horses to
water.  “My lord,” said his wife unto Teirnyon, “where is the colt which
thou didst save on the night that thou didst find the boy?”  “I have
commanded the grooms of the horses,” said he, “that they take care of
him.”  “Would it not be well, lord,” said she, “if thou wert to cause him
to be broken in, and given to the boy, seeing that on the same night that
thou didst find the boy, the colt was foaled and thou didst save him?”
“I will not oppose thee in this matter,” said Teirnyon.  “I will allow
thee to give him the colt.”  “Lord,” said she, “may Heaven reward thee; I
will give it him.”  So the horse was given to the boy.  Then she went to
the grooms and those who tended the horses, and commanded them to be
careful of the horse, so that he might be broken in by the time that the
boy could ride him.

And while these things were going forward, they heard tidings of Rhiannon
and her punishment.  And Teirnyon Twryv Vliant, by reason of the pity
that he felt on hearing this story of Rhiannon and her punishment,
inquired closely concerning it, until he had heard from many of those who
came to his court.  Then did Teirnyon, often lamenting the sad history,
ponder within himself, and he looked steadfastly on the boy, and as he
looked upon him, it seemed to him that he had never beheld so great a
likeness between father and son, as between the boy and Pwyll the Chief
of Annwvyn.  Now the semblance of Pwyll was well known to him, for he had
of yore been one of his followers.  And thereupon he became grieved for
the wrong that he did, in keeping with him a boy whom he knew to be the
son of another man.  And the first time that he was alone with his wife,
he told her that it was not right that they should keep the boy with
them, and suffer so excellent a lady as Rhiannon to be punished so
greatly on his account, whereas the boy was the son of Pwyll the Chief of
Annwvyn.  And Teirnyon’s wife agreed with him, that they should send the
boy to Pwyll.  “And three things, lord,” said she, “shall we gain
thereby.  Thanks and gifts for releasing Rhiannon from her punishment;
and thanks from Pwyll for nursing his son and restoring him unto him; and
thirdly, if the boy is of gentle nature, he will be our foster-son, and
he will do for us all the good in his power.”  So it was settled
according to this counsel.

And no later than the next day was Teirnyon equipped, and two other
knights with him.  And the boy, as a fourth in their company, went with
them upon the horse which Teirnyon had given him.  And they journeyed
towards Narberth, and it was not long before they reached that place.
And as they drew near to the palace, they beheld Rhiannon sitting beside
the horseblock.  And when they were opposite to her, “Chieftain,” said
she, “go not further thus, I will bear every one of you into the palace,
and this is my penance for slaying my own son and devouring him.”  “Oh,
fair lady,” said Teirnyon, “think not that I will be one to be carried
upon thy back.”  “Neither will I,” said the boy.  “Truly, my soul,” said
Teirnyon, “we will not go.”  So they went forward to the palace, and
there was great joy at their coming.  And at the palace a feast was
prepared, because Pywll was come back from the confines of Dyved.  And
they went into the hall and washed, and Pwyll rejoiced to see Teirnyon.
And in this order they sat.  Teirnyon between Pwyll and Rhiannon, and
Teirnyon’s two companions on the other side of Pwyll, with the boy
between them.  And after meat they began to carouse and to discourse.
And Teirnyon’s discourse was concerning the adventure of the mare and the
boy, and how he and his wife had nursed and reared the child as their
own.  “And behold here is thy son, lady,” said Teirnyon.  “And whosoever
told that lie concerning thee, has done wrong.  And when I heard of thy
sorrow, I was troubled and grieved.  And I believe that there is none of
this host who will not perceive that the boy is the son of Pwyll,” said
Teirnyon.  “There is none,” said they all, “who is not certain thereof.”
“I declare to Heaven,” said Rhiannon, “that if this be true, there is
indeed an end to my trouble.”  “Lady,” said Pendaran Dyved, “well hast
thou named thy son Pryderi, {3} and well becomes him the name of Pryderi
son of Pwyll Chief of Annwvyn.”  “Look you,” said Rhiannon, “will not his
own name become him better?”  “What name has he?” asked Pendaran Dyved.
“Gwri Wallt Euryn is the name that we gave him.”  “Pryderi,” said
Pendaran, “shall his name be.”  “It were more proper,” said Pwyll, “that
the boy should take his name from the word his mother spoke when she
received the joyful tidings of him.”  And thus was it arranged.

“Teirnyon,” said Pwyll, “Heaven reward thee that thou hast reared the boy
up to this time, and, being of gentle lineage, it were fitting that he
repay thee for it.”  “My lord,” said Teirnyon, “it was my wife who nursed
him, and there is no one in the world so afflicted as she at parting with
him.  It were well that he should bear in mind what I and my wife have
done for him.”  “I call Heaven to witness,” said Pwyll, “that while I
live I will support thee and thy possessions, as long as I am able to
preserve my own.  And when he shall have power, he will more fitly
maintain them than I.  And if this counsel be pleasing unto thee, and to
my nobles, it shall be that, as thou hast reared him up to the present
time, I will give him to be brought up by Pendaran Dyved, from
henceforth.  And you shall be companions, and shall both be
foster-fathers unto him.”  “This is good counsel,” said they all.  So the
boy was given to Pendaran Dyved, and the nobles of the land were sent
with him.  And Teirnyon Twryv Vliant, and his companions, set out for his
country, and his possessions, with love and gladness.  And he went not
without being offered the fairest jewels and the fairest horses, and the
choicest dogs; but he would take none of them.

Thereupon they all remained in their own dominions.  And Pryderi, the son
of Pwyll the Chief of Annwvyn, was brought up carefully as was fit, so
that he became the fairest youth, and the most comely, and the best
skilled in all good games, of any in the kingdom.  And thus passed years
and years, until the end of Pwyll the Chief of Annwvyn’s life came, and
he died.

And Pryderi ruled the seven Cantrevs of Dyved prosperously, and he was
beloved by his people, and by all around him.  And at length he added
unto them the three Cantrevs of Ystrad Tywi, and the four Cantrevs of
Cardigan; and these were called the Seven Cantrevs of Seissyllwch.  And
when he made this addition, Pryderi the son of Pwyll the Chief of Annwvyn
desired to take a wife.  And the wife he chose was Kicva, the daughter of
Gwynn Gohoyw, the son of Gloyw Wallt Lydan, the son of Prince Casnar, one
of the nobles of this Island.

And thus ends this portion of the Mabinogion.




BRANWEN THE DAUGHTER OF LLYR
HERE IS THE SECOND PORTION OF THE MABINOGI


BENDIGEID VRAN, the son of Llyr, was the crowned king of this island, and
he was exalted from the crown of London.  And one afternoon he was at
Harlech in Ardudwy, at his Court, and he sat upon the rock of Harlech,
looking over the sea.  And with him were his brother Manawyddan the son
of Llyr, and his brothers by the mother’s side, Nissyen and Evnissyen,
and many nobles likewise, as was fitting to see around a king.  His two
brothers by the mother’s side were the sons of Eurosswydd, by his mother,
Penardun, the daughter of Beli son of Manogan.  And one of these youths
was a good youth and of gentle nature, and would make peace between his
kindred, and cause his family to be friends when their wrath was at the
highest; and this one was Nissyen; but the other would cause strife
between his two brothers when they were most at peace.  And as they sat
thus, they beheld thirteen ships coming from the south of Ireland, and
making towards them, and they came with a swift motion, the wind being
behind them, and they neared them rapidly.  “I see ships afar,” said the
king, “coming swiftly towards the land.  Command the men of the Court
that they equip themselves, and go and learn their intent.”  So the men
equipped themselves and went down towards them.  And when they saw the
ships near, certain were they that they had never seen ships better
furnished.  Beautiful flags of satin were upon them.  And behold one of
the ships outstripped the others, and they saw a shield lifted up above
the side of the ship, and the point of the shield was upwards, in token
of peace.  And the men drew near that they might hold converse.  Then
they put out boats and came towards the land.  And they saluted the king.
Now the king could hear them from the place where he was, upon the rock
above their heads.  “Heaven prosper you,” said he, “and be ye welcome.
To whom do these ships belong, and who is the chief amongst you?”
“Lord,” said they, “Matholwch, king of Ireland, is here, and these ships
belong to him.”  “Wherefore comes he?” asked the king, “and will he come
to the land?”  “He is a suitor unto thee, lord,” said they, “and he will
not land unless he have his boon.”  “And what may that be?” inquired the
king.  “He desires to ally himself with thee, lord,” said they, “and he
comes to ask Branwen the daughter of Llyr, that, if it seem well to thee,
the Island of the Mighty may be leagued with Ireland, and both become
more powerful.”  “Verily,” said he, “let him come to land, and we will
take counsel thereupon.”  And this answer was brought to Matholwch.  “I
will go willingly,” said he.  So he landed, and they received him
joyfully; and great was the throng in the palace that night, between his
hosts and those of the Court; and next day they took counsel, and they
resolved to bestow Branwen upon Matholwch.  Now she was one of the three
chief ladies of this island, and she was the fairest damsel in the world.

And they fixed upon Aberffraw as the place where she should become his
bride.  And they went thence, and towards Aberffraw the hosts proceeded;
Matholwch and his host in their ships; Bendigeid Vran and his host by
land, until they came to Aberffraw.  And at Aberffraw they began the
feast and sat down.  And thus sat they.  The King of the Island of the
Mighty and Manawyddan the son of Llyr on one side, and Matholwch on the
other side, and Branwen the daughter of Llyr beside him.  And they were
not within a house, but under tents.  No house could ever contain
Bendigeid Vran.  And they began the banquet and caroused and discoursed.
And when it was more pleasing to them to sleep than to carouse, they went
to rest, and that night Branwen became Matholwch’s bride.

And next day they arose, and all they of the Court, and the officers
began to equip and to range the horses and the attendants, and they
ranged them in order as far as the sea.

And behold one day, Evnissyen, the quarrelsome man of whom it is spoken
above, came by chance into the place, where the horses of Matholwch were,
and asked whose horses they might be.  “They are the horses of Matholwch
king of Ireland, who is married to Branwen, thy sister; his horses are
they.”  “And is it thus they have done with a maiden such as she, and
moreover my sister, bestowing her without my consent?  They could have
offered no greater insult to me than this,” said he.  And thereupon he
rushed under the horses and cut off their lips at the teeth, and their
ears close to their heads, and their tails close to their backs, and
wherever he could clutch their eyelids, he cut them to the very bone, and
he disfigured the horses and rendered them useless.

And they came with these tidings unto Matholwch, saying that the horses
were disfigured, and injured so that not one of them could ever be of any
use again.  “Verily, lord,” said one, “it was an insult unto thee, and as
such was it meant.”  “Of a truth, it is a marvel to me, that if they
desire to insult me, they should have given me a maiden of such high rank
and so much beloved of her kindred, as they have done.”  “Lord,” said
another, “thou seest that thus it is, and there is nothing for thee to do
but to go to thy ships.”  And thereupon towards his ships he set out.

And tidings came to Bendigeid Vran that Matholwch was quitting the Court
without asking leave, and messengers were sent to inquire of him
wherefore he did so.  And the messengers that went were Iddic the son of
Anarawd, and Heveydd Hir.  And these overtook him and asked of him what
he designed to do, and wherefore he went forth.  “Of a truth,” said he,
“if I had known I had not come hither.  I have been altogether insulted,
no one had ever worse treatment than I have had here.  But one thing
surprises me above all.”  “What is that?” asked they.  “That Branwen the
daughter of Llyr, one of the three chief ladies of this island, and the
daughter of the King of the Island of the Mighty, should have been given
me as my bride, and that after that I should have been insulted; and I
marvel that the insult was not done me before they had bestowed upon me a
maiden so exalted as she.”  “Truly, lord, it was not the will of any that
are of the Court,” said they, “nor of any that are of the council, that
thou shouldest have received this insult; and as thou hast been insulted,
the dishonour is greater unto Bendigeid Vran than unto thee.”  “Verily,”
said he, “I think so.  Nevertheless he cannot recall the insult.”  These
men returned with that answer to the place where Bendigeid Vran was, and
they told him what reply Matholwch had given them.  “Truly,” said he,
“there are no means by which we may prevent his going away at enmity with
us, that we will not take.”  “Well, lord,” said they, “send after him
another embassy.”  “I will do so,” said he.  “Arise, Manawyddan son of
Llyr, and Heveydd Hir, and Unic Glew Ysgwyd, and go after him, and tell
him that he shall have a sound horse for every one that has been injured.
And beside that, as an atonement for the insult, he shall have a staff of
silver, as large and as tall as himself, and a plate of gold of the
breadth of his face.  And show unto him who it was that did this, and
that it was done against my will; but that he who did it is my brother,
by the mother’s side, and therefore it would be hard for me to put him to
death.  And let him come and meet me,” said he, “and we will make peace
in any way he may desire.”

The embassy went after Matholwch, and told him all these sayings in a
friendly manner, and he listened thereunto.  “Men,” said he, “I will take
counsel.”  So to the council he went.  And in the council they considered
that if they should refuse this, they were likely to have more shame
rather than to obtain so great an atonement.  They resolved therefore to
accept it, and they returned to the Court in peace.

Then the pavilions and the tents were set in order after the fashion of a
hall; and they went to meat, and as they had sat at the beginning of the
feast, so sat they there.  And Matholwch and Bendigeid Vran began to
discourse; and behold it seemed to Bendigeid Vran, while they talked,
that Matholwch was not so cheerful as he had been before.  And he thought
that the chieftain might be sad, because of the smallness of the
atonement which he had, for the wrong that had been done him.  “Oh, man,”
said Bendigeid Vran, “thou dost not discourse to-night so cheerfully as
thou wast wont.  And if it be because of the smallness of the atonement,
thou shalt add thereunto whatsoever thou mayest choose, and to-morrow I
will pay thee the horses.”  “Lord,” said he, “Heaven reward thee.”  “And
I will enhance the atonement,” said Bendigeid Vran, “for I will give unto
thee a cauldron, the property of which is, that if one of thy men be
slain to-day, and be cast therein, to-morrow he will be as well as ever
he was at the best, except that he will not regain his speech.”  And
thereupon he gave him great thanks, and very joyful was he for that
cause.

And the next morning they paid Matholwch the horses as long as the
trained horses lasted.  And then they journeyed into another commot,
where they paid him with colts until the whole had been paid, and from
thenceforth that commot was called Talebolion.

And a second night sat they together.  “My lord,” said Matholwch, “whence
hadst thou the cauldron which thou hast given me?”  “I had it of a man
who had been in thy land,” said he, “and I would not give it except to
one from there.”  “Who was it?” asked he.  “Llassar Llaesgyvnewid; he
came here from Ireland with Kymideu Kymeinvoll, his wife, who escaped
from the Iron House in Ireland, when it was made red hot around them, and
fled hither.  And it is a marvel to me that thou shouldst know nothing
concerning the matter.”  “Something I do know,” said he, “and as much as
I know I will tell thee.  One day I was hunting in Ireland, and I came to
the mound at the head of the lake, which is called the Lake of the
Cauldron.  And I beheld a huge yellow-haired man coming from the lake
with a cauldron upon his back.  And he was a man of vast size, and of
horrid aspect, and a woman followed after him.  And if the man was tall,
twice as large as he was the woman, and they came towards me and greeted
me.  ‘Verily,’ asked I, ‘wherefore are you journeying?’  ‘Behold, this,’
said he to me, ‘is the cause that we journey.  At the end of a month and
a fortnight this woman will have a son; and the child that will be born
at the end of the month and the fortnight will be a warrior fully armed.’
So I took them with me and maintained them.  And they were with me for a
year.  And that year I had them with me not grudgingly.  But thenceforth
was there murmuring, because that they were with me.  For, from the
beginning of the fourth month they had begun to make themselves hated and
to be disorderly in the land; committing outrages, and molesting and
harassing the nobles and ladies; and thenceforward my people rose up and
besought me to part with them, and they bade me to choose between them
and my dominions.  And I applied to the council of my country to know
what should be done concerning them; for of their own free will they
would not go, neither could they be compelled against their will, through
fighting.  And [the people of the country] being in this strait, they
caused a chamber to be made all of iron.  Now when the chamber was ready,
there came there every smith that was in Ireland, and every one who owned
tongs and hammer.  And they caused coals to be piled up as high as the
top of the chamber.  And they had the man, and the woman, and the
children, served with plenty of meat and drink; but when it was known
that they were drunk, they began to put fire to the coals about the
chamber, and they blew it with bellows until the house was red hot all
around them.  Then was there a council held in the centre of the floor of
the chamber.  And the man tarried until the plates of iron were all of a
white heat; and then, by reason of the great heat, the man dashed against
the plates with his shoulder and struck them out, and his wife followed
him; but except him and his wife none escaped thence.  And then I
suppose, lord,” said Matholwch unto Bendigeid Vran, “that he came over
unto thee.”  “Doubtless he came here,” said he, “and gave unto me the
cauldron.”  “In what manner didst thou receive them?”  “I dispersed them
through every part of my dominions, and they have become numerous and are
prospering everywhere, and they fortify the places where they are with
men and arms, of the best that were ever seen.”

That night they continued to discourse as much as they would, and had
minstrelsy and carousing, and when it was more pleasant to them to sleep
than to sit longer, they went to rest.  And thus was the banquet carried
on with joyousness; and when it was finished, Matholwch journeyed towards
Ireland, and Branwen with him, and they went from Aber Menei with
thirteen ships, and came to Ireland.  And in Ireland was there great joy
because of their coming.  And not one great man or noble lady visited
Branwen unto whom she gave not either a clasp, or a ring, or a royal
jewel to keep, such as it was honourable to be seen departing with.  And
in these things she spent that year in much renown, and she passed her
time pleasantly, enjoying honour and friendship.  And in the meanwhile it
chanced that she became pregnant, and in due time a son was born unto
her, and the name that they gave him was Gwern the son of Matholwch, and
they put the boy out to be foster-nursed, in a place where were the best
men of Ireland.

And behold in the second year a tumult arose in Ireland, on account of
the insult which Matholwch had received in Cambria, and the payment made
him for his horses.  And his foster-brothers, and such as were nearest
unto him, blamed him openly for that matter.  And he might have no peace
by reason of the tumult until they should revenge upon him this disgrace.
And the vengeance which they took was to drive away Branwen from the same
chamber with him, and to make her cook for the Court; and they caused the
butcher after he had cut up the meat to come to her and give her every
day a blow on the ear, and such they made her punishment.

“Verily, lord,” said his men to Matholwch, “forbid now the ships and the
ferry boats and the coracles, that they go not into Cambria, and such as
come over from Cambria hither, imprison them that they go not back for
this thing to be known there.”  And he did so; and it was thus for not
less than three years.

And Branwen reared a starling in the cover of the kneading trough, and
she taught it to speak, and she taught the bird what manner of man her
brother was.  And she wrote a letter of her woes, and the despite with
which she was treated, and she bound the letter to the root of the bird’s
wing, and sent it towards Britain.  And the bird came to this island, and
one day it found Bendigeid Vran at Caer Seiont in Arvon, conferring
there, and it alighted upon his shoulder and ruffled its feathers, so
that the letter was seen, and they knew that the bird had been reared in
a domestic manner.

Then Bendigeid Vran took the letter and looked upon it.  And when he had
read the letter he grieved exceedingly at the tidings of Branwen’s woes.
And immediately he began sending messengers to summon the island
together.  And he caused sevenscore and four countries to come unto him,
and he complained to them himself of the grief that his sister endured.
So they took counsel.  And in the council they resolved to go to Ireland,
and to leave seven men as princes here, and Caradawc, the son of Bran, as
the chief of them, and their seven knights.  In Edeyrnion were these men
left.  And for this reason were the seven knights placed in the town.
Now the names of these seven men were, Caradawc the son of Bran, and
Heveydd Hir, and Unic Glew Ysgwyd, and Iddic the son of Anarawc
Gwalltgrwn, and Fodor the son of Ervyll, and Gwlch Minascwrn, and Llassar
the son of Llaesar Llaesgygwyd, and Pendaran Dyved as a young page with
them.  And these abode as seven ministers to take charge of this island;
and Caradawc the son of Bran was the chief amongst them.

Bendigeid Vran, with the host of which we spoke, sailed towards Ireland,
and it was not far across the sea, and he came to shoal water.  It was
caused by two rivers; the Lli and the Archan were they called; and the
nations covered the sea.  Then he proceeded with what provisions he had
on his own back, and approached the shore of Ireland.

Now the swineherds of Matholwch were upon the seashore, and they came to
Matholwch.  “Lord,” said they, “greeting be unto thee.”  “Heaven protect
you,” said he, “have you any news?”  “Lord,” said they, “we have
marvellous news, a wood have we seen upon the sea, in a place where we
never yet saw a single tree.”  “This is indeed a marvel,” said he; “saw
you aught else?”  “We saw, lord,” said they, “a vast mountain beside the
wood, which moved, and there was a lofty ridge on the top of the
mountain, and a lake on each side of the ridge.  And the wood, and the
mountain, and all these things moved.”  “Verily,” said he, “there is none
who can know aught concerning this, unless it be Branwen.”

Messengers then went unto Branwen.  “Lady,” said they, “what thinkest
thou that this is?”  “The men of the Island of the Mighty, who have come
hither on hearing of my ill-treatment and my woes.”  “What is the forest
that is seen upon the sea?” asked they.  “The yards and the masts of
ships,” she answered.  “Alas,” said they, “what is the mountain that is
seen by the side of the ships?”  “Bendigeid Vran, my brother,” she
replied, “coming to shoal water; there is no ship that can contain him in
it.”  “What is the lofty ridge with the lake on each side thereof?”  “On
looking towards this island he is wroth, and his two eyes, one on each
side of his nose, are the two lakes beside the ridge.”

The warriors and the chief men of Ireland were brought together in haste,
and they took counsel.  “Lord,” said the nobles unto Matholwch, “there is
no other counsel than to retreat over the Linon (a river which is in
Ireland), and to keep the river between thee and him, and to break down
the bridge that is across the river, for there is a loadstone at the
bottom of the river that neither ship nor vessel can pass over.”  So they
retreated across the river, and broke down the bridge.

Bendigeid Vran came to land, and the fleet with him by the bank of the
river.  “Lord,” said his chieftains, “knowest thou the nature of this
river, that nothing can go across it, and there is no bridge over it?”
“What,” said they, “is thy counsel concerning a bridge?”  “There is
none,” said he, “except that he who will be chief, let him be a bridge.
I will be so,” said he.  And then was that saying first uttered, and it
is still used as a proverb.  And when he had lain down across the river,
hurdles were placed upon him, and the host passed over thereby.

And as he rose up, behold the messengers of Matholwch came to him, and
saluted him, and gave him greeting in the name of Matholwch, his kinsman,
and showed how that of his goodwill he had merited of him nothing but
good.  “For Matholwch has given the kingdom of Ireland to Gwern the son
of Matholwch, thy nephew and thy sister’s son.  And this he places before
thee, as a compensation for the wrong and despite that has been done unto
Branwen.  And Matholwch shall be maintained wheresoever thou wilt, either
here or in the Island of the Mighty.”  Said Bendigeid Vran, “Shall not I
myself have the kingdom?  Then peradventure I may take counsel concerning
your message.  From this time until then no other answer will you get
from me.”  “Verily,” said they, “the best message that we receive for
thee, we will convey it unto thee, and do thou await our message unto
him.”  “I will wait,” answered he, “and do you return quickly.”

The messengers set forth and came to Matholwch.  “Lord,” said they,
“prepare a better message for Bendigeid Vran.  He would not listen at all
to the message that we bore him.”  “My friends,” said Matholwch, “what
may be your counsel?”  “Lord,” said they, “there is no other counsel than
this alone.  He was never known to be within a house, make therefore a
house that will contain him and the men of the Island of the Mighty on
the one side, and thyself and thy host on the other; and give over thy
kingdom to his will, and do him homage.  So by reason of the honour thou
doest him in making him a house, whereas he never before had a house to
contain him, he will make peace with thee.”  So the messengers went back
to Bendigeid Vran, bearing him this message.

And he took counsel, and in the council it was resolved that he should
accept this, and this was all done by the advice of Branwen, and lest the
country should be destroyed.  And this peace was made, and the house was
built both vast and strong.  But the Irish planned a crafty device, and
the craft was that they should put brackets on each side of the hundred
pillars that were in the house, and should place a leathern bag on each
bracket, and an armed man in every one of them.  Then Evnissyen came in
before the host of the Island of the Mighty, and scanned the house with
fierce and savage looks, and descried the leathern bags which were around
the pillars.  “What is in this bag?” asked he of one of the Irish.
“Meal, good soul,” said he.  And Evnissyen felt about it until he came to
the man’s head, and he squeezed the head until he felt his fingers meet
together in the brain through the bone.  And he left that one and put his
hand upon another, and asked what was therein.  “Meal,” said the
Irishman.  So he did the like unto every one of them, until he had not
left alive, of all the two hundred men, save one only; and when he came
to him, he asked what was there.  “Meal, good soul,” said the Irishman.
And he felt about until he felt the head, and he squeezed that head as he
had done the others.  And, albeit he found that the head of this one was
armed, he left him not until he had killed him.  And then he sang an
Englyn:—

   “There is in this bag a different sort of meal,
   The ready combatant, when the assault is made
   By his fellow-warriors, prepared for battle.”

Thereupon came the hosts unto the house.  The men of the Island of
Ireland entered the house on the one side, and the men of the Island of
the Mighty on the other.  And as soon as they had sat down there was
concord between them; and the sovereignty was conferred upon the boy.
When the peace was concluded, Bendigeid Vran called the boy unto him, and
from Bendigeid Vran the boy went unto Manawyddan, and he was beloved by
all that beheld him.  And from Manawyddan the boy was called by Nissyen
the son of Eurosswydd, and the boy went unto him lovingly.  “Wherefore,”
said Evnissyen, “comes not my nephew the son of my sister unto me?
Though he were not king of Ireland, yet willingly would I fondle the
boy.”  “Cheerfully let him go to thee,” said Bendigeid Vran, and the boy
went unto him cheerfully.  “By my confession to Heaven,” said Evnissyen
in his heart, “unthought of by the household is the slaughter that I will
this instant commit.”

Then he arose and took up the boy by the feet, and before any one in the
house could seize hold of him, he thrust the boy headlong into the
blazing fire.  And when Branwen saw her son burning in the fire, she
strove to leap into the fire also, from the place where she sat between
her two brothers.  But Bendigeid Vran grasped her with one hand, and his
shield with the other.  Then they all hurried about the house, and never
was there made so great a tumult by any host in one house as was made by
them, as each man armed himself.  Then said Morddwydtyllyon, “The
gadflies of Morddwydtyllyon’s Cow!”  And while they all sought their
arms, Bendigeid Vran supported Branwen between his shield and his
shoulder.

Then the Irish kindled a fire under the cauldron of renovation, and they
cast the dead bodies into the cauldron until it was full, and the next
day they came forth fighting-men as good as before, except that they were
not able to speak.  Then when Evnissyen saw the dead bodies of the men of
the Island of the Mighty nowhere resuscitated, he said in his heart,
“Alas! woe is me, that I should have been the cause of bringing the men
of the Island of the Mighty into so great a strait.  Evil betide me if I
find not a deliverance therefrom.”  And he cast himself among the dead
bodies of the Irish, and two unshod Irishmen came to him, and, taking him
to be one of the Irish, flung him into the cauldron.  And he stretched
himself out in the cauldron, so that he rent the cauldron into four
pieces, and burst his own heart also.

In consequence of that the men of the Island of the Mighty obtained such
success as they had; but they were not victorious, for only seven men of
them all escaped, and Bendigeid Vran himself was wounded in the foot with
a poisoned dart.  Now the seven men that escaped were Pryderi,
Manawyddan, Gluneu Eil Taran, Taliesin, Ynawc, Grudyen the son of Muryel,
and Heilyn the son of Gwynn Hen.

And Bendigeid Vran commanded them that they should cut off his head.
“And take you my head,” said he, “and bear it even unto the White Mount,
in London, and bury it there, with the face towards France.  And a long
time will you be upon the road.  In Harlech you will be feasting seven
years, the birds of Rhiannon singing unto you the while.  And all that
time the head will be to you as pleasant company as it ever was when on
my body.  And at Gwales in Penvro you will be fourscore years, and you
may remain there, and the head with you uncorrupted, until you open the
door that looks towards Aber Henvelen, and towards Cornwall.  And after
you have opened that door, there you may no longer tarry, set forth then
to London to bury the head, and go straight forward.”

So they cut off his head, and these seven went forward therewith.  And
Branwen was the eighth with them, and they came to land at Aber Alaw, in
Talebolyon, and they sat down to rest.  And Branwen looked towards
Ireland and towards the Island of the Mighty, to see if she could descry
them.  “Alas,” said she, “woe is me that I was ever born; two islands
have been destroyed because of me!”  Then she uttered a loud groan, and
there broke her heart.  And they made her a four-sided grave, and buried
her upon the banks of the Alaw.

Then the seven men journeyed forward towards Harlech, bearing the head
with them; and as they went, behold there met them a multitude of men and
of women.  “Have you any tidings?” asked Manawyddan.  “We have none,”
said they, “save that Caswallawn the son of Beli has conquered the Island
of the Mighty, and is crowned king in London.”  “What has become,” said
they, “of Caradawc the son of Bran, and the seven men who were left with
him in this island?”  “Caswallawn came upon them, and slew six of the
men, and Caradawc’s heart broke for grief thereof; for he could see the
sword that slew the men, but knew not who it was that wielded it.
Caswallawn had flung upon him the Veil of Illusion, so that no one could
see him slay the men, but the sword only could they see.  And it liked
him not to slay Caradawc, because he was his nephew, the son of his
cousin.  And now he was the third whose heart had broke through grief.
Pendaran Dyved, who had remained as a young page with these men, escaped
into the wood,” said they.

Then they went on to Harlech, and there stopped to rest, and they
provided meat and liquor, and sat down to eat and to drink.  And there
came three birds, and began singing unto them a certain song, and all the
songs they had ever heard were unpleasant compared thereto; and the birds
seemed to them to be at a great distance from them over the sea, yet they
appeared as distinct as if they were close by, and at this repast they
continued seven years.

And at the close of the seventh year they went forth to Gwales in Penvro.
And there they found a fair and regal spot overlooking the ocean; and a
spacious hall was therein.  And they went into the hall, and two of its
doors were open, but the third door was closed, that which looked towards
Cornwall.  “See, yonder,” said Manawyddan, “is the door that we may not
open.”  And that night they regaled themselves and were joyful.  And of
all they had seen of food laid before them, and of all they had heard of,
they remembered nothing; neither of that, nor of any sorrow whatsoever.
And there they remained fourscore years, unconscious of having ever spent
a time more joyous and mirthful.  And they were not more weary than when
first they came, neither did they, any of them, know the time they had
been there.  And it was not more irksome to them having the head with
them, than if Bendigeid Vran had been with them himself.  And because of
these fourscore years, it was called “the Entertaining of the noble
Head.”  The entertaining of Branwen and Matholwch was in the time that
they went to Ireland.

One day said Heilyn the son of Gwynn, “Evil betide me, if I do not open
the door to know if that is true which is said concerning it.”  So he
opened the door and looked towards Cornwall and Aber Henvelen.  And when
they had looked, they were as conscious of all the evils they had ever
sustained, and of all the friends and companions they had lost, and of
all the misery that had befallen them, as if all had happened in that
very spot; and especially of the fate of their lord.  And because of
their perturbation they could not rest, but journeyed forth with the head
towards London.  And they buried the head in the White Mount, and when it
was buried, this was the third goodly concealment; and it was the third
ill-fated disclosure when it was disinterred, inasmuch as no invasion
from across the sea came to this island while the head was in that
concealment.

And thus is the story related of those who journeyed over from Ireland.

In Ireland none were left alive, except five pregnant women in a cave in
the Irish wilderness; and to these five women in the same night were born
five sons, whom they nursed until they became grown-up youths.  And they
thought about wives, and they at the same time desired to possess them,
and each took a wife of the mothers of their companions, and they
governed the country and peopled it.

And these five divided it amongst them, and because of this partition are
the five divisions of Ireland still so termed.  And they examined the
land where the battles had taken place, and they found gold and silver
until they became wealthy.

And thus ends this portion of the Mabinogi, concerning the blow given to
Branwen, which was the third unhappy blow of this island; and concerning
the entertainment of Bran, when the hosts of sevenscore countries and ten
went over to Ireland to revenge the blow given to Branwen; and concerning
the seven years’ banquet in Harlech, and the singing of the birds of
Rhiannon, and the sojourning of the head for the space of fourscore
years.




MANAWYDDAN THE SON OF LLYR
HERE IS THE THIRD PORTION OF THE MABINOGI


WHEN the seven men of whom we spoke above had buried the head of
Bendigeid Vran, in the White Mount an London, with its face towards
France; Manawyddan gazed upon the town of London, and upon his
companions, and heaved a great sigh; and much grief and heaviness came
upon him.  “Alas, Almighty Heaven, woe is me,” he exclaimed, “there is
none save myself without a resting-place this night.”  “Lord,” said
Pryderi, “be not so sorrowful.  Thy cousin is king of the Island of the
Mighty, and though he should do thee wrong, thou hast never been a
claimant of land or possessions.  Thou art the third disinherited
prince.”  “Yea,” answered he, “but although this man is my cousin, it
grieveth me to see any one in the place of my brother Bendigeid Vran,
neither can I be happy in the same dwelling with him.”  “Wilt thou follow
the counsel of another?” said Pryderi.  “I stand in need of counsel,” he
answered, “and what may that counsel be?”  “Seven Cantrevs remain unto
me,” said Pryderi, “wherein Rhiannon my mother dwells.  I will bestow her
upon thee and the seven Cantrevs with her, and though thou hadst no
possessions but those Cantrevs only, thou couldst not have seven Cantrevs
fairer than they.  Kicva, the daughter of Gwynn Gloyw, is my wife, and
since the inheritance of the Cantrevs belongs to me, do thou and Rhiannon
enjoy them, and if thou ever desire any possessions thou wilt take
these.”  “I do not, Chieftain,” said he; “Heaven reward thee for thy
friendship.”  “I would show thee the best friendship in the world if thou
wouldst let me.”  “I will, my friend,” said he, “and Heaven reward thee.
I will go with thee to seek Rhiannon and to look at thy possessions.”
“Thou wilt do well,” he answered.  “And I believe that thou didst never
hear a lady discourse better than she, and when she was in her prime none
was ever fairer.  Even now her aspect is not uncomely.”

They set forth, and, however long the journey, they came at length to
Dyved, and a feast was prepared for them against their coming to
Narberth, which Rhiannon and Kicva had provided.  Then began Manawyddan
and Rhiannon to sit and to talk together, and from their discourse his
mind and his thoughts became warmed towards her, and he thought in his
heart he had never beheld any lady more fulfilled of grace and beauty
than she.  “Pryderi,” said he, “I will that it be as thou didst say.”
“What saying was that?” asked Rhiannon.  “Lady,” said Pryderi, “I did
offer thee as a wife to Manawyddan the son of Llyr.”  “By that will I
gladly abide,” said Rhiannon.  “Right glad am I also,” said Manawyddan;
“may Heaven reward him who hath shown unto me friendship so perfect as
this.”

And before the feast was over she became his bride.  Said Pryderi, “Tarry
ye here the rest of the feast, and I will go into Lloegyr to tender my
homage unto Caswallawn the son of Beli.”  “Lord,” said Rhiannon,
“Caswallawn is in Kent, thou mayest therefore tarry at the feast, and
wait until he shall be nearer.”  “We will wait,” he answered.  So they
finished the feast.  And they began to make the circuit of Dyved, and to
hunt, and to take their pleasure.  And as they went through the country,
they had never seen lands more pleasant to live in, nor better hunting
grounds, nor greater plenty of honey and fish.  And such was the
friendship between those four, that they would not be parted from each
other by night nor by day.

And in the midst of all this he went to Caswallawn at Oxford, and
tendered his homage; and honourable was his reception there, and highly
was he praised for offering his homage.

And after his return, Pryderi and Manawyddan feasted and took their ease
and pleasure.  And they began a feast at Narberth, for it was the chief
palace; and there originated all honour.  And when they had ended the
first meal that night, while those who served them ate, they arose and
went forth, and proceeded all four to the Gorsedd of Narberth, and their
retinue with them.  And as they sat thus, behold, a peal of thunder, and
with the violence of the thunderstorm, lo there came a fall of mist, so
thick that not one of them could see the other.  And after the mist it
became light all around.  And when they looked towards the place where
they were wont to see cattle, and herds, and dwellings, they saw nothing
now, neither house, nor beast, nor smoke, nor fire, nor man, nor
dwelling; but the houses of the Court empty, and desert, and uninhabited,
without either man or beast within them.  And truly all their companions
were lost to them, without their knowing aught of what had befallen them,
save those four only.

“In the name of Heaven,” cried Manawyddan, “where are they of the Court,
and all my host beside these?  Let us go and see.”  So they came into the
hall, and there was no man; and they went on to the castle and to the
sleeping-place, and they saw none; and in the mead-cellar and in the
kitchen there was nought but desolation.  So they four feasted, and
hunted, and took their pleasure.  Then they began to go through the land
and all the possessions that they had, and they visited the houses and
dwellings, and found nothing but wild beasts.  And when they had consumed
their feast and all their provisions, they fed upon the prey they killed
in hunting, and the honey of the wild swarms.  And thus they passed the
first year pleasantly, and the second; but at the last they began to be
weary.

“Verily,” said Manawyddan, “we must not bide thus.  Let us go into
Lloegyr, and seek some craft whereby we may gain our support.”  So they
went into Lloegyr, and came as far as Hereford.  And they betook
themselves to making saddles.  And Manawyddan began to make housings, and
he gilded and coloured them with blue enamel, in the manner that he had
seen it done by Llasar Llaesgywydd.  And he made the blue enamel as it
was made by the other man.  And therefore is it still called Calch Lasar
[blue enamel], because Llasar Llaesgywydd had wrought it.

And as long as that workmanship could be had of Manawyddan, neither
saddle nor housing was bought of a saddler throughout all Hereford; till
at length every one of the saddlers perceived that they were losing much
of their gain, and that no man bought of them, but him who could not get
what he sought from Manawyddan.  Then they assembled together, and agreed
to slay him and his companions.

Now they received warning of this, and took counsel whether they should
leave the city.  “By Heaven,” said Pryderi, “it is not my counsel that we
should quit the town, but that we should slay these boors.”  “Not so,”
said Manawyddan, “for if we fight with them, we shall have evil fame, and
shall be put in prison.  It were better for us to go to another town to
maintain ourselves.”  So they four went to another city.

“What craft shall we take?” said Pryderi.  “We will make shields,” said
Manawyddan.  “Do we know anything about that craft?” said Pryderi.  “We
will try,” answered he.  There they began to make shields, and fashioned
them after the shape of the good shields they had seen; and they
enamelled they, as them had done the saddles.  And they prospered in that
place, so that not a shield was asked for in the whole town, but such as
was had of them.  Rapid therefore was their work, and numberless were the
shields they made.  But at last they were marked by the craftsmen, who
came together in haste, and their fellow-townsmen with them, and agreed
that they should seek to slay them.  But they received warning, and heard
how the men had resolved on their destruction.  “Pryderi,” said
Manawyddan, “these men desire to slay us.”  “Let us not endure this from
these boors, but let us rather fall upon them and slay them.”  “Not so,”
he answered; “Caswallawn and his men will hear of it, and we shall be
undone.  Let us go to another town.”  So to another town they went.

“What craft shall we take?” said Manawyddan.  “Whatsoever thou wilt that
we know,” said Pryderi.  “Not so,” he replied, “but let us take to making
shoes, for there is not courage enough among cordwainers either to fight
with us or to molest us.”  “I know nothing thereof,” said Pryderi.  “But
I know,” answered Manawyddan; “and I will teach thee to stitch.  We will
not attempt to dress the leather, but we will buy it ready dressed and
will make the shoes from it.”

So he began by buying the best cordwal that could be had in the town, and
none other would he buy except the leather for the soles; and he
associated himself with the best goldsmith in the town, and caused him to
make clasps for the shoes, and to gild the clasps, and he marked how it
was done until he learnt the method.  And therefore was he called one of
the three makers of Gold Shoes; and, when they could be had from him, not
a shoe nor hose was bought of any of the cordwainers in the town.  But
when the cordwainers perceived that their gains were failing (for as
Manawyddan shaped the work, so Pryderi stitched it), they came together
and took counsel, and agreed that they would slay them.

“Pryderi,” said Manawyddan, “these men are minded to slay us.”
“Wherefore should we bear this from the boorish thieves?” said Pryderi.
“Rather let us slay them all.”  “Not so,” said Manawyddan, “we will not
slay them, neither will we remain in Lloegyr any longer.  Let us set
forth to Dyved and go to see it.”

So they journeyed along until they came to Dyved, and they went forward
to Narberth.  And there they kindled fire and supported themselves by
hunting.  And thus they spent a month.  And they gathered their dogs
around them, and tarried there one year.

And one morning Pryderi and Manawyddan rose up to hunt, and they ranged
their dogs and went forth from the palace.  And some of the dogs ran
before them and came to a small bush which was near at hand; but as soon
as they were come to the bush, they hastily drew back and returned to the
men, their hair bristling up greatly.  “Let us go near to the bush,” said
Pryderi, “and see what is in it.”  And as they came near, behold, a wild
boar of a pure white colour rose up from the bush.  Then the dogs, being
set on by the men, rushed towards him; but he left the bush and fell back
a little way from the men, and made a stand against the dogs without
retreating from them, until the men had come near.  And when the men came
up, he fell back a second time, and betook him to flight.  Then they
pursued the boar until they beheld a vast and lofty castle, all newly
built, in a place where they had never before seen either stone or
building.  And the boar ran swiftly into the castle and the dogs after
him.  Now when the boar and the dogs had gone into the castle, they began
to wonder at finding a castle in a place where they had never before seen
any building whatsoever.  And from the top of the Gorsedd they looked and
listened for the dogs.  But so long as they were there they heard not one
of the dogs nor aught concerning them.

“Lord,” said Pryderi, “I will go into the castle to get tidings of the
dogs.”  “Truly,” he replied, “thou wouldst be unwise to go into this
castle, which thou hast never seen till now.  If thou wouldst follow my
counsel, thou wouldst not enter therein.  Whosoever has cast a spell over
this land has caused this castle to be here.”  “Of a truth,” answered
Pryderi, “I cannot thus give up my dogs.”  And for all the counsel that
Manawyddan gave him, yet to the castle he went.

When he came within the castle, neither man nor beast, nor boar nor dogs,
nor house nor dwelling saw he within it.  But in the centre of the castle
floor he beheld a fountain with marble work around it, and on the margin
of the fountain a golden bowl upon a marble slab, and chains hanging from
the air, to which he saw no end.

And he was greatly pleased with the beauty of the gold, and with the rich
workmanship of the bowl, and he went up to the bowl and laid hold of it.
And when he had taken hold of it his hands stuck to the bowl, and his
feet to the slab on which the howl was placed, and all his joyousness
forsook him, so that he could not utter a word.  And thus he stood.

And Manawyddan waited for him till near the close of the day.  And late
in the evening, being certain that he should have no tidings of Pryderi
or of the dogs, he went back to the palace.  And as he entered, Rhiannon
looked at him.  “Where,” said she, “are thy companion and thy dogs?”
“Behold,” he answered, “the adventure that has befallen me.”  And he
related it all unto her.  “An evil companion hast thou been,” said
Rhiannon, “and a good companion hast thou lost.”  And with that word she
went out, and proceeded towards the castle according to the direction
which he gave her.  The gate of the castle she found open.  She was
nothing daunted, and she went in.  And as she went in, she perceived
Pryderi laying hold of the bowl, and she went towards him.  “Oh, my
lord,” said she, “what dust thou do here?”  And she took hold of the bowl
with him; and as she did so her hands became fast to the bowl, and her
feet to the slab, and she was not able to utter a word.  And with that,
as it became night, lo, there came thunder upon them, and a fall of mist,
and thereupon the castle vanished, and they with it.

When Kicva the daughter of Gwynn Gloyw saw that there was no one in the
palace but herself and Manawyddan, she sorrowed so that she cared not
whether she lived or died.  And Manawyddan saw this.  “Thou art in the
wrong,” said he, “if through fear of me thou grievest thus.  I call
Heaven to witness that thou hast never seen friendship mere pure than
that which I will bear thee, as long as Heaven will that thou shouldst be
thus.  I declare to thee that were I in the dawn of youth I would keep my
faith unto Pryderi, and unto thee also will I keep it.  Be there no fear
upon thee, therefore,” said he, “for Heaven is my witness that thou shalt
meet with all the friendship thou canst wish, and that it is in my power
to show thee, as long as it shall please Heaven to continue us in this
grief and woe.”  “Heaven reward thee,” she said, “and that is what I
deemed of thee.”  And the damsel thereupon took courage and was glad.

“Truly, lady,” said Manawyddan, “it is not fitting for us to stay here,
we have lost our dogs, and we cannot get food.  Let us go into Lloegyr;
it is easiest for us to find support there.”  “Gladly, lord,” said she,
“we will do so.”  And they set forth together to Lloegyr.

“Lord,” said she, “what craft wilt thou follow?  Take up one that is
seemly.”  “None other will I take,” answered he, “save that of making
shoes, as I did formerly.”  “Lord,” said she, “such a craft becomes not a
man so nobly born as thou.”  “By that however will I abide,” said he.

So he began his craft, and he made all his work of the finest leather he
could get in the town, and, as he had done at the other place, he caused
gilded clasps to be made for the shoes.  And except himself all the
cordwainers in the town were idle, and without work.  For as long as they
could be had from him, neither shoes nor hose were bought elsewhere.  And
thus they tarried there a year, until the cordwainers became envious, and
took counsel concerning him.  And he had warning thereof, and it was told
him how the cordwainers had agreed together to slay him.

“Lord,” said Kicva, “wherefore should this be borne from these boors?”
“Nay,” said he, “we will go back unto Dyved.”  So towards Dyved they set
forth.

Now Manawyddan, when he set out to return to Dyved, took with him a
burden of wheat.  And he proceeded towards Narberth, and there he dwelt.
And never was he better pleased than when he saw Narberth again, and the
lands where he had been wont to hunt with Pryderi and with Rhiannon.  And
he accustomed himself to fish, and to hunt the deer in their covert.  And
then he began to prepare some ground, and he sowed a croft, and a second,
and a third.  And no wheat in the world ever sprung up better.  And the
three crofts prospered with perfect growth, and no man ever saw fairer
wheat than it.

And thus passed the seasons of the year until the harvest came.  And he
went to look at one of his crofts, and behold it was ripe.  “I will reap
this to-morrow,” said he.  And that night he went back to Narberth, and
on the morrow in the grey dawn he went to reap the croft, and when he
came there he found nothing but the bare straw.  Every one of the ears of
the wheat was cut from off the stalk, and all the ears carried entirely
away, and nothing but the straw left.  And at this he marvelled greatly.

Then he went to look at another croft, and behold that also was ripe.
“Verily,” said he, “this will I reap to-morrow.”  And on the morrow he
came with the intent to reap it, and when he came there he found nothing
but the bare straw.  “Oh, gracious Heaven,” he exclaimed, “I know that
whosoever has begun my ruin is completing it, and has also destroyed the
country with me.”

Then he went to look at the third croft, and when he came there, finer
wheat had there never been seen, and this also was ripe.  “Evil betide
me,” said he, “if I watch not here to-night.  Whoever carried off the
other corn will come in like manner to take this.  And I will know who it
is.”  So he took his arms, and began to watch the croft.  And he told
Kicva all that had befallen.  “Verily,” said she, “what thinkest thou to
do?”  “I will watch the croft to-night,” said he.

And he went to watch the croft.  And at midnight, lo, there arose the
loudest tumult in the world.  And he looked, and behold the mightiest
host of mice in the world, which could neither be numbered nor measured.
And he knew not what it was until the mice had made their way into the
croft, and each of them climbing up the straw and bending it down with
its weight, had cut off one of the ears of wheat, and had carried it
away, leaving there the stalk, and he saw not a single stalk there that
had not a mouse to it.  And they all took their way, carrying the ears
with them.

In wrath and anger did he rush upon the mice, but he could no more come
up with them than if they had been gnats, or birds in the air, except one
only, which though it was but sluggish, went so fast that a man on foot
could scarce overtake it.  And after this one he went, and he caught it
and put it in his glove, and tied up the opening of the glove with a
string, and kept it with him, and returned to the palace.  Then he came
to the hall where Kicva was, and he lighted a fire, and hung the glove by
the string upon a peg.  “What hast thou there, lord?” said Kicva.  “A
thief,” said he, “that I found robbing me.”  “What kind of thief may it
be, lord, that thou couldst put into thy glove?” said she.  “Behold I
will tell thee,” he answered.  Then he showed her how his fields had been
wasted and destroyed, and how the mice came to the last of the fields in
his sight.  “And one of them was less nimble than the rest, and is now in
my glove; to-morrow I will hang it, and before Heaven, if I had them, I
would hang them all.”  “My lord,” said she, “this is marvellous; but yet
it would be unseemly for a man of dignity like thee to be hanging such a
reptile as this.  And if thou doest right, thou wilt not meddle with the
creature, but wilt let it go.”  “Woe betide me,” said he, “if I would not
hang them all could I catch them, and such as I have I will hang.”
“Verily, lord,” said she, “there is no reason that I should succour this
reptile, except to prevent discredit unto thee.  Do therefore, lord, as
thou wilt.”  “If I knew of any cause in the world wherefore thou shouldst
succour it, I would take thy counsel concerning it,” said Manawyddan,
“but as I know of none, lady, I am minded to destroy it.”  “Do so
willingly then,” said she.

And then he went to the Gorsedd of Narberth, taking the mouse with him.
And he set up two forks on the highest part of the Gorsedd.  And while he
was doing this, behold he saw a scholar coming towards him, in old and
poor and tattered garments.  And it was now seven years since he had seen
in that place either man or beast, except those four persons who had
remained together until two of them were lost.

“My lord,” said the scholar, “good day to thee.”  “Heaven prosper thee,
and my greeting be unto thee.  And whence dost thou come, scholar?” asked
he.  “I come, lord, from singing in Lloegyr; and wherefore dost thou
inquire?”  “Because for the last seven years,” answered he, “I have seen
no man here save four secluded persons, and thyself this moment.”
“Truly, lord,” said he, “I go through this land unto mine own.  And what
work art thou upon, lord?”  “I am hanging a thief that I caught robbing
me,” said he.  “What manner of thief is that?” asked the scholar.  “I see
a creature in thy hand like unto a mouse, and ill does it become a man of
rank equal to thine to touch a reptile such as this.  Let it go forth
free.”  “I will not let it go free, by Heaven,” said he; “I caught it
robbing me, and the doom of a thief will I inflict upon it, and I will
hang it.”  “Lord,” said he, “rather than see a man of rank equal to thine
at such a work as this, I would give thee a pound which I have received
as alms, to let the reptile go forth free.”  “I will not let it go free,”
said he, “by Heaven, neither will I sell it.”  “As thou wilt, lord,” he
answered; “except that I would not see a man of rank equal to thine
touching such a reptile, I care nought.”  And the scholar went his way.

And as he was placing the crossbeam upon the two forks, behold a priest
came towards him upon a horse covered with trappings.  “Good day to thee,
lord,” said he.  “Heaven prosper thee,” said Manawyddan; “thy blessing.”
“The blessing of Heaven be upon thee.  And what, lord, art thou doing?”
“I am hanging a thief that I caught robbing me,” said he.  “What manner
of thief, lord?” asked he.  “A creature,” he answered, “in form of a
mouse.  It has been robbing me, and I am inflicting upon it the doom of a
thief.”  “Lord,” said he, “rather than see thee touch this reptile, I
would purchase its freedom.”  “By my confession to Heaven, neither will I
sell it nor set it free.”  “It is true, lord, that it is worth nothing to
buy; but rather than see thee defile thyself by touching such a reptile
as this, I will give thee three pounds to let it go.”  “I will not, by
Heaven,” said he, “take any price for at.  As it ought, so shall it be
hanged.”  “Willingly, lord, do thy good pleasure.”  And the priest went
his way.

Then he noosed the string around the mouse’s neck, and as he was about to
draw it up, behold, he saw a bishop’s retinue with his sumpter-horses,
and his attendants.  And the bishop himself came towards him.  And he
stayed his work.  “Lord bishop,” said he, “thy blessing.”  “Heaven’s
blessing be unto thee,” said he; “what work art thou upon?”  “Hanging a
thief that I caught robbing me,” said he.  “Is not that a mouse that I
see in thy hand?”  “Yes,” answered he.  “And she has robbed me.”  “Aye,”
said he, “since I have come at the doom of this reptile, I will ransom it
of thee.  I will give thee seven pounds for it, and that rather than see
a man of rank equal to thine destroying so vile a reptile as this.  Let
it loose and thou shalt have the money.”  “I declare to Heaven that I
will not set it loose.”  “If thou wilt not loose it for this, I will give
thee four-and-twenty pounds of ready money to set it free.”  “I will not
set it free, by Heaven, for as much again,” said he.  “If thou wilt not
set it free for this, I will give thee all the horses that thou seest in
this plain, and the seven loads of baggage, and the seven horses that
they are upon.”  “By Heaven, I will not,” he replied.  “Since for this
thou wilt not, do so at what price soever thou wilt.”  “I will do so,”
said he.  “I will that Rhiannon and Pryderi be free,” said he.  “That
thou shalt have,” he answered.  “Not yet will I loose the mouse, by
Heaven.”  “What then wouldst thou?”  “That the charm and the illusion be
removed from the seven Cantrevs of Dyved.”  “This shalt thou have also;
set therefore the mouse free.”  “I will not set it free, by Heaven,” said
he.  “I will know who the mouse may be.”  “She is my wife.”  “Even though
she be, I will not set her free.  Wherefore came she to me?”  “To despoil
thee,” he answered.  “I am Llwyd the son of Kilcoed, and I cast the charm
over the seven Cantrevs of Dyved.  And it was to avenge Gwawl the son of
Clud, from the friendship I had towards him, that I cast the charm.  And
upon Pryderi did I revenge Gwawl the son of Clud, for the game of Badger
in the Bag, that Pwyll Pen Annwvyn played upon him, which he did
unadvisedly in the Court of Heveydd Hên.  And when it was known that thou
wast come to dwell in the land, my household came and besought me to
transform them into mice, that they might destroy thy corn.  And it was
my own household that went the first night.  And the second night also
they went, and they destroyed thy two crofts.  And the third night came
unto me my wife and the ladies of the Court, and besought me to transform
them.  And I transformed them.  Now she is pregnant.  And had she not
been pregnant thou wouldst not have been able to overtake her; but since
this has taken place, and she has been caught, I will restore thee
Pryderi and Rhiannon; and I will take the charm and illusion from off
Dyved.  I have now told thee who she is.  Set her therefore free.”  “I
will not set her free, by Heaven,” said he.  “What wilt thou more?” he
asked.  “I will that there be no more charm upon the seven Cantrevs of
Dyved, and that none shall be put upon it henceforth.”  “This thou shalt
have,” said he.  “Now set her free.”  “I will not, by my faith,” he
answered.  “What wilt thou furthermore?” asked he.  “Behold,” said he,
“this will I have; that vengeance be never taken for this, either upon
Pryderi or Rhiannon, or upon me.”  “All this shalt thou have.  And truly
thou hast done wisely in asking this.  Upon thy head would have lighted
all this trouble.”  “Yea,” said he, “for fear thereof was it, that I
required this.”  “Set now my wife at liberty.”  “I will not, by Heaven,”
said he, “until I see Pryderi and Rhiannon with me free.”  “Behold, here
they come,” he answered.

And thereupon behold Pryderi and Rhiannon.  And he rose up to meet them,
and greeted them, and sat down beside them.  “Ah, Chieftain, set now my
wife at liberty,” said the bishop.  “Hast thou not received all thou
didst ask?”  “I will release her gladly,” said he.  And thereupon he set
her free.

Then Llwyd struck her with a magic wand, and she was changed back into a
young woman, the fairest ever seen.

“Look around upon thy land,” said he, “and then thou wilt see it all
tilled and peopled, as it was in its best state.”  And he rose up and
looked forth.  And when he looked he saw all the lands tilled, and full
of herds and dwellings.  “What bondage,” he inquired, “has there been
upon Pryderi and Rhiannon?”  “Pryderi has had the knockers of the gate of
my palace about his neck, and Rhiannon has had the collars of the asses,
after they have been carrying hay, about her neck.”

And such had been their bondage.

And by reason of this bondage is this story called the Mabinogi of
Mynnweir and Mynord.

And thus ends this portion of the Mabinogi.




MATH THE SON OF MATHONWY
THIS IS THE FOURTH PORTION OF THE MABINOGI


MATH the son of Mathonwy was lord over Gwynedd, and Pryderi the son of
Pwyll was lord over the one-and-twenty Cantrevs of the South; and these
were the seven Cantrevs of Dyved, and the seven Cantrevs of Morganwc, the
four Cantrevs of Ceredigiawn, and the three of Ystrad Tywi.

At that time, Math the son of Mathonwy could not exist unless his feet
were in the lap of a maiden, except only when he was prevented by the
tumult of war.  Now the maiden who was with him was Goewin, the daughter
of Pebin of Dôl Pebin, in Arvon, and she was the fairest maiden of her
time who was known there.

And Math dwelt always at Caer Dathyl, in Arvon, and was not able to go
the circuit of the land, but Gilvaethwy the son of Don, and Eneyd the son
of Don, his nephews, the sons of his sisters, with his household, went
the circuit of the land in his stead.

Now the maiden was with Math continually, and Gilvaethwy the son of Don
set his affections upon her, and loved her so that he knew not what he
should do because of her, and therefrom behold his hue, and his aspect,
and his spirits changed for love of her, so that it was not easy to know
him.

One day his brother Gwydion gazed steadfastly upon him.  “Youth,” said
he, “what aileth thee?”  “Why,” replied he, “what seest thou in me?”  “I
see,” said he, “that thou hast lost thy aspect and thy hue; what,
therefore, aileth thee?”  “My lord brother,” he answered, “that which
aileth me, it will not profit me that I should own to any.”  “What may it
be, my soul?” said he.  “Thou knowest,” he said, “that Math the son of
Mathonwy has this property, that if men whisper together, in a tone how
low soever, if the wind meet it, it becomes known unto him.”  “Yes,” said
Gwydion, “hold now thy peace, I know thy intent, thou lovest Goewin.”

When he found that his brother knew his intent, he gave the heaviest sigh
in the world.  “Be silent, my soul, and sigh not,” he said.  “It is not
thereby that thou wilt succeed.  I will cause,” said he, “if it cannot be
otherwise, the rising of Gwynedd, and Powys, and Deheubarth, to seek the
maiden.  Be thou of glad cheer therefore, and I will compass it.”

So they went unto Math the son of Mathonwy.  “Lord,” said Gwydion, “I
have heard that there have come to the South some beasts, such as were
never known in this island before.”  “What are they called?” he asked.
“Pigs, lord.”  “And what kind of animals are they?”  “They are small
animals, and their flesh is better than the flesh of oxen.”  “They are
small, then?”  “And they change their names.  Swine are they now called.”
“Who owneth them?”  “Pryderi the son of Pwyll; they were sent him from
Annwvyn, by Arawn the king of Annwvyn, and still they keep that name,
half hog, half pig.”  “Verily,” asked he, “and by what means may they be
obtained from him?”  “I will go, lord, as one of twelve, in the guise of
bards, to seek the swine.”  “But it may be that he will refuse you,” said
he.  “My journey will not be evil, lord,” said he; “I will not come back
without the swine.”  “Gladly,” said he, “go thou forward.”

So he and Gilvaethwy went, and ten other men with them.  And they came
into Ceredigiawn, to the place that is now called Rhuddlan Teivi, where
the palace of Pryderi was.  In the guise of bards they came in, and they
were received joyfully, and Gwydion was placed beside Pryderi that night.

“Of a truth,” said Pryderi, “gladly would I have a tale from some of your
men yonder.”  “Lord,” said Gwydion, “we have a custom that the first
night that we come to the Court of a great man, the chief of song
recites.  Gladly will I relate a tale.”  Now Gwydion was the best teller
of tales in the world, and he diverted all the Court that night with
pleasant discourse and with tales, so that he charmed every one in the
Court, and it pleased Pryderi to talk with him.

And after this, “Lord,” said he unto Pryderi, “were it more pleasing to
thee, that another should discharge my errand unto thee, than that I
should tell thee myself what it is?”  “No,” he answered, “ample speech
hast thou.”  “Behold then, lord,” said he, “my errand.  It is to crave
from thee the animals that were sent thee from Annwvyn.”  “Verily,” he
replied, “that were the easiest thing in the world to grant, were there
not a covenant between me and my land concerning them.  And the covenant
is that they shall not go from me, until they have produced double their
number in the land.”  “Lord,” said he, “I can set thee free from those
words, and this is the way I can do so; give me not the swine to-night,
neither refuse them unto me, and to-morrow I will show thee an exchange
for them.”

And that night he and his fellows went unto their lodging, and they took
counsel.  “Ah, my men,” said he, “we shall not have the swine for the
asking.”  “Well,” said they, “how may they be obtained?”  “I will cause
them to be obtained,” said Gwydion.

Then he betook himself to his arts, and began to work a charm.  And he
caused twelve chargers to appear, and twelve black greyhounds, each of
them white-breasted, and having upon them twelve collars and twelve
leashes, such as no one that saw them could know to be other than gold.
And upon the horses twelve saddles, and every part which should have been
of iron was entirely of gold, and the bridles were of the same
workmanship.  And with the horses and the dogs he came to Pryderi.

“Good day unto thee, lord,” said he.  “Heaven prosper thee,” said the
other, “and greetings be unto thee.”  “Lord,” said he, “behold here is a
release for thee from the word which thou spakest last evening concerning
the swine; that thou wouldst neither give nor sell them.  Thou mayest
exchange them for that which is better.  And I will give these twelve
horses, all caparisoned as they are, with their saddles and their
bridles, and these twelve greyhounds, with their collars and their
leashes as thou seest, and the twelve gilded shields that thou beholdest
yonder.”  Now these he had formed of fungus.  “Well,” said he, “we will
take counsel.”  And they consulted together, and determined to give the
swine to Gwydion, and to take his horses and his dogs and his shields.

Then Gwydion and his men took their leave, and began to journey forth
with the pigs.  “Ah, my comrades,” said Gwydion, “it is needful that we
journey with speed.  The illusion will not last but from the one hour to
the same to-morrow.”

And that night they journeyed as far as the upper part of Ceredigiawn, to
the place which, from that cause, is called Mochdrev still.  And the next
day they took their course through Melenydd, and came that night to the
town which is likewise for that reason called Mochdrev between Keri and
Arwystli.  And thence they journeyed forward; and that night they came as
far as that Commot in Powys, which also upon account thereof is called
Mochnant, and there tarried they that night.  And they journeyed thence
to the Cantrev of Rhos, and the place where they were that night is still
called Mochdrev.

“My men,” said Gwydion, “we must push forward to the fastnesses of
Gwynedd with these animals, for there is a gathering of hosts in pursuit
of us.”  So they journeyed on to the highest town of Arllechwedd, and
there they made a sty for the swine, and therefore was the name of
Creuwyryon given to that town.  And after they had made the sty for the
swine, they proceeded to Math the son of Mathonwy, at Caer Dathyl.  And
when they came there, the country was rising.  “What news is there here?”
asked Gwydion.  “Pryderi is assembling one-and-twenty Cantrevs to pursue
after you,” answered they.  “It is marvellous that you should have
journeyed so slowly.”  “Where are the animals whereof you went in quest?”
said Math.  “They have had a sty made for them in the other Cantrev
below,” said Gwydion.

Thereupon, lo, they heard the trumpets and the host in the land, and they
arrayed themselves and set forward and came to Penardd in Arvon.

And at night Gwydion the son of Don, and Gilvaethwy his brother, returned
to Caer Dathyl; and Gilvaethwy took Math the son of Mathonwy’s couch.
And while he turned out the other damsels from the room discourteously,
he made Goewin unwillingly remain.

And when they saw the day on the morrow, they went back unto the place
where Math the son of Mathonwy was with his host; and when they came
there, the warriors were taking counsel in what district they should
await the coming of Pryderi, and the men of the South.  So they went in
to the council.  And it was resolved to wait in the strongholds of
Gwynedd, in Arvon.  So within the two Maenors they took their stand,
Maenor Penardd and Maenor Coed Alun.  And there Pryderi attacked them,
and there the combat took place.  And great was the slaughter on both
sides; but the men of the South were forced to flee.  And they fled unto
the place which is still called Nantcall.  And thither did they follow
them, and they made a vast slaughter of them there, so that they fled
again as far as the place called Dol Pen Maen, and there they halted and
sought to make peace.

And that he might have peace, Pryderi gave hostages, Gwrgi Gwastra gave
he and three-and-twenty others, sons of nobles.  And after this they
journeyed in peace even unto Traeth Mawr; but as they went on together
towards Melenryd, the men on foot could not be restrained from shooting.
Pryderi dispatched unto Math an embassy to pray him to forbid his people,
and to leave it between him and Gwydion the son of Don, for that he had
caused all this.  And the messengers came to Math.  “Of a truth,” said
Math, “I call Heaven to witness, if it be pleasing unto Gwydion the son
of Don, I will so leave it gladly.  Never will I compel any to go to
fight, but that we ourselves should do our utmost.”

“Verily,” said the messengers, “Pryderi saith that it were more fair that
the man who did him this wrong should oppose his own body to his, and let
his people remain unscathed.”  “I declare to Heaven, I will not ask the
men of Gwynedd to fight because of me.  If I am allowed to fight Pryderi
myself, gladly will I oppose my body to his.”  And this answer they took
back to Pryderi.  “Truly,” said Pryderi, “I shall require no one to
demand my rights but myself.”

Then these two came forth and armed themselves, and they fought.  And by
force of strength, and fierceness, and by the magic and charms of
Gwydion, Pryderi was slain.  And at Maen Tyriawc, above Melenryd, was he
buried, and there is his grave.

And the men of the South set forth in sorrow towards their own land; nor
is it a marvel that they should grieve, seeing that they had lost their
lord, and many of their best warriors, and for the most part their horses
and their arms.

The men of Gwynedd went back joyful and in triumph.  “Lord,” said Gwydion
unto Math, “would it not be right for us to release the hostages of the
men of the South, which they pledged unto us for peace? for we ought not
to put them in prison.”  “Let them then be set free,” saith Math.  So
that youth, and the other hostages that were with him, were set free to
follow the men of the South.

Math himself went forward to Caer Dathyl.  Gilvaethwy the son of Don, and
they of the household that were with him, went to make the circuit of
Gwynedd as they were wont, without coming to the Court.  Math went into
his chamber, and caused a place to be prepared for him whereon to
recline, so that he might put his feet in the maiden’s lap.  “Lord,” said
Goewin, “seek now another to hold thy feet, for I am now a wife.”  “What
meaneth this?” said he.  “An attack, lord, was made unawares upon me; but
I held not my peace, and there was no one in the Court who knew not of
it.  Now the attack was made by thy nephews, lord, the sons of thy
sister, Gwydion the son of Don, and Gilvaethwy the son of Don; unto me
they did wrong, and unto thee dishonour.”  “Verily,” he exclaimed, “I
will do to the utmost of my power concerning this matter.  But first I
will cause thee to have compensation, and then will I have amends made
unto myself.  As for thee, I will take thee to be my wife, and the
possession of my dominions will I give unto thy hands.”

And Gwydion and Gilvaethwy came not near the Court, but stayed in the
confines of the land until it was forbidden to give them meat and drink.
At first they came not near unto Math, but at the last they came.
“Lord,” said they, “good day to thee.”  “Well,” said he, “is it to make
me compensation that ye are come?”  “Lord,” they said, “we are at thy
will.”  “By my will I would not have lost my warriors, and so many arms
as I have done.  You cannot compensate me my shame, setting aside the
death of Pryderi.  But since ye come hither to be at my will, I shall
begin your punishment forthwith.”

Then he took his magic wand, and struck Gilvaethwy, so that he became a
deer, and he seized upon the other hastily lest he should escape from
him.  And he struck him with the same magic wand, and he became a deer
also.  “Since now ye are in bonds, I will that ye go forth together and
be companions, and possess the nature of the animals whose form ye bear.
And this day twelvemonth come hither unto me.”

At the end of a year from that day, lo there was a loud noise under the
chamber wall, and the barking of the dogs of the palace together with the
noise.  “Look,” said he, “what is without.”  “Lord,” said one, “I have
looked; there are there two deer, and a fawn with them.”  Then he arose
and went out.  And when he came he beheld the three animals.  And he
lifted up his wand.  “As ye were deer last year, be ye wild hogs each and
either of you, for the year that is to come.”  And thereupon he struck
them with the magic wand.  “The young one will I take and cause to be
baptized.”  Now the name that he gave him was Hydwn.  “Go ye and be wild
swine, each and either of you, and be ye of the nature of wild swine.
And this day twelvemonth be ye here under the wall.”

At the end of the year the barking of dogs was heard under the wall of
the chamber.  And the Court assembled, and thereupon he arose and went
forth, and when he came forth he beheld three beasts.  Now these were the
beasts that he saw; two wild hogs of the woods, and a well-grown young
one with them.  And he was very large for his age.  “Truly,” said Math,
“this one will I take and cause to be baptized.”  And he struck him with
his magic wand, and he become a fine fair auburn-haired youth, and the
name that he gave him was Hychdwn.  “Now as for you, as ye were wild hogs
last year, be ye wolves each and either of you for the year that is to
come.”  Thereupon he struck them with his magic wand, and they became
wolves.  “And be ye of like nature with the animals whose semblance ye
bear, and return here this day twelvemonth beneath this wall.”

And at the same day at the end of the year, he heard a clamour and a
barking of dogs under the wall of the chamber.  And he rose and went
forth.  And when he came, behold, he saw two wolves, and a strong cub
with them.  “This one will I take,” said Math, “and I will cause him to
be baptized; there is a name prepared for him, and that is Bleiddwn.  Now
these three, such are they:—

   The three sons of Gilvaethwy the false,
   The three faithful combatants,
   Bleiddwn, Hydwn, and Hychdwn the Tall.”

Then he struck the two with his magic wand, and they resumed their own
nature.  “Oh men,” said he, “for the wrong that ye did unto me sufficient
has been your punishment and your dishonour.  Prepare now precious
ointment for these men, and wash their heads, and equip them.”  And this
was done.

And after they were equipped, they came unto him.  “Oh men,” said he,
“you have obtained peace, and you shall likewise have friendship.  Give
your counsel unto me, what maiden I shall seek.”  “Lord,” said Gwydion
the son of Don, “it is easy to give thee counsel; seek Arianrod, the
daughter of Don, thy niece, thy sister’s daughter.”

And they brought her unto him, and the maiden came in.  “Ha, damsel,”
said he, “art thou the maiden?”  “I know not, lord, other than that I
am.”  Then he took up his magic wand, and bent it.  “Step over this,”
said he, “and I shall know if thou art the maiden.”  Then stepped she
over the magic wand, and there appeared forthwith a fine chubby
yellow-haired boy.  And at the crying out of the boy, she went towards
the door.  And thereupon some small form was seen; but before any one
could get a second glimpse of it, Gwydion had taken it, and had flung a
scarf of velvet around it and hidden it.  Now the place where he hid it
was the bottom of a chest at the foot of his bed.

“Verily,” said Math the son of Mathonwy, concerning the fine
yellow-haired boy, “I will cause this one to be baptized, and Dylan is
the name I will give him.”

So they had the boy baptized, and as they baptized him he plunged into
the sea.  And immediately when he was in the sea, he took its nature, and
swam as well as the best fish that was therein.  And for that reason was
he called Dylan, the son of the Wave.  Beneath him no wave ever broke.
And the blow whereby he came to his death, was struck by his uncle
Govannon.  The third fatal blow was it called.

As Gwydion lay one morning on his bed awake, he heard a cry in the chest
at his feet; and though it was not loud, it was such that he could hear
it.  Then he arose in haste, and opened the chest: and when he opened it,
he beheld an infant boy stretching out his arms from the folds of the
scarf, and casting it aside.  And he took up the boy in his arms, and
carried him to a place where he knew there was a woman that could nurse
him.  And he agreed with the woman that she should take charge of the
boy.  And that year he was nursed.

And at the end of the year he seemed by his size as though he were two
years old.  And the second year he was a big child, and able to go to the
Court by himself.  And when he came to the Court, Gwydion noticed him,
and the boy became familiar with him, and loved him better than any one
else.  Then was the boy reared at the Court until he was four years old,
when he was as big as though he had been eight.

And one day Gwydion walked forth, and the boy followed him, and he went
to the Castle of Arianrod, having the boy with him; and when he came into
the Court, Arianrod arose to meet him, and greeted him and bade him
welcome.  “Heaven prosper thee,” said he.  “Who is the boy that followeth
thee?” she asked.  “This youth, he is thy son,” he answered.  “Alas,”
said she, “what has come unto thee that thou shouldst shame me thus?
wherefore dost thou seek my dishonour, and retain it so long as this?”
“Unless thou suffer dishonour greater than that of my bringing up such a
boy as this, small will be thy disgrace.”  “What is the name of the boy?”
said she.  “Verily,” he replied, “he has not yet a name.”  “Well,” she
said, “I lay this destiny upon him, that he shall never have a name until
he receives one from me.”  “Heaven bears me witness,” answered he, “that
thou art a wicked woman.  But the boy shall have a name how displeasing
soever it may be unto thee.  As for thee, that which afflicts thee is
that thou art no longer called a damsel.”  And thereupon he went forth in
wrath, and returned to Caer Dathyl and there he tarried that night.

And the next day he arose and took the boy with him, and went to walk on
the seashore between that place and Aber Menei.  And there he saw some
sedges and seaweed, and he turned them into a boat.  And out of dry
sticks and sedges he made some Cordovan leather, and a great deal
thereof, and he coloured it in such a manner that no one ever saw leather
more beautiful than it.  Then he made a sail to the boat, and he and the
boy went in it to the port of the castle of Arianrod.  And he began
forming shoes and stitching them, until he was observed from the castle.
And when he knew that they of the castle were observing him, he disguised
his aspect, and put another semblance upon himself, and upon the boy, so
that they might not be known.  “What men are those in yonder boat?” said
Arianrod.  “They are cordwainers,” answered they.  “Go and see what kind
of leather they have, and what kind of work they can do.”

So they came unto them.  And when they came he was colouring some
Cordovan leather, and gilding it.  And the messengers came and told her
this.  “Well,” said she, “take the measure of my foot, and desire the
cordwainer to make shoes for me.”  So he made the shoes for her, yet not
according to the measure, but larger.  The shoes then were brought unto
her, and behold they were too large.  “These are too large,” said she,
“but he shall receive their value.  Let him also make some that are
smaller than they.”  Then he made her others that were much smaller than
her foot, and sent them unto her.  “Tell him that these will not go on my
feet,” said she.  And they told him this.  “Verily,” said he, “I will not
make her any shoes, unless I see her foot.”  And this was told unto her.
“Truly,” she answered, “I will go unto him.”

So she went down to the boat, and when she came there, he was shaping
shoes and the boy stitching them.  “Ah, lady,” said he, “good day to
thee.”  “Heaven prosper thee,” said she.  “I marvel that thou canst not
manage to make shoes according to a measure.”  “I could not,” he replied,
“but now I shall be able.”

Thereupon behold a wren stood upon the deck of the boat, and the boy shot
at it, and hit it in the leg between the sinew and the bone.  Then she
smiled.  “Verily,” said she, “with a steady hand did the lion aim at it.”
“Heaven reward thee not, but now has he got a name.  And a good enough
name it is.  Llew Llaw Gyffes be he called henceforth.”

Then the work disappeared in seaweed and sedges, and he went on with it
no further.  And for that reason was he called the third Gold-shoemaker.
“Of a truth,” said she, “thou wilt not thrive the better for doing evil
unto me.”  “I have done thee no evil yet,” said he.  Then he restored the
boy to his own form.  “Well,” said she, “I will lay a destiny upon this
boy, that he shall never have arms and armour until I invest him with
them.”  “By Heaven,” said he, “let thy malice be what it may, he shall
have arms.”

Then they went towards Dinas Dinllev, and there he brought up Llew Llaw
Gyffes, until he could manage any horse, and he was perfect in features,
and strength, and stature.  And then Gwydion saw that he languished
through the want of horses and arms.  And he called him unto him.  “Ah,
youth,” said he, “we will go to-morrow on an errand together.  Be
therefore more cheerful than thou art.”  “That I will,” said the youth.

Next morning, at the dawn of day, they arose.  And they took way along
the sea coast, up towards Bryn Aryen.  And at the top of Cevn Clydno they
equipped themselves with horses, and went towards the Castle of Arianrod.
And they changed their form, and pricked towards the gate in the
semblance of two youths, but the aspect of Gwydion was more staid than
that of the other.  “Porter,” said he, “go thou in and say that there are
here bards from Glamorgan.”  And the porter went in.  “The welcome of
Heaven be unto them, let them in,” said Arianrod.

With great joy were they greeted.  And the hall was arranged, and they
went to meat.  When meat was ended, Arianrod discoursed with Gwydion of
tales and stories.  Now Gwydion was an excellent teller of tales.  And
when it was time to leave off feasting, a chamber was prepared for them,
and they went to rest.

In the early twilight Gwydion arose, and he called unto him his magic and
his power.  And by the time that the day dawned, there resounded through
the land uproar, and trumpets and shouts.  When it was now day, they
heard a knocking at the door of the chamber, and therewith Arianrod
asking that it might be opened.  Up rose the youth and opened unto her,
and she entered and a maiden with her.  “Ah, good men,” she said, “in
evil plight are we.”  “Yes, truly,” said Gwydion, “we have heard trumpets
and shouts; what thinkest thou that they may mean?”  “Verily,” said she,
“we cannot see the colour of the ocean by reason of all the ships, side
by side.  And they are making for the land with all the speed they can.
And what can we do?” said she.  “Lady,” said Gwydion, “there is none
other counsel than to close the castle upon us, and to defend it as best
we may.”  “Truly,” said she, “may Heaven reward you.  And do you defend
it.  And here may you have plenty of arms.”

And thereupon went she forth for the arms, and behold she returned, and
two maidens, and suits of armour for two men, with her.  “Lady,” said he,
“do you accoutre this stripling, and I will arm myself with the help of
thy maidens.  Lo, I hear the tumult of the men approaching.”  “I will do
so, gladly.”  So she armed him fully, and that right cheerfully.  “Hast
thou finished arming the youth?” said he.  “I have finished,” she
answered.  “I likewise have finished,” said Gwydion.  “Let us now take
off our arms, we have no need of them.”  “Wherefore?” said she.  “Here is
the army around the house.”  “Oh, lady, there is here no army.”  “Oh,”
cried she, “whence then was this tumult?”  “The tumult was but to break
thy prophecy and to obtain arms for thy son.  And now has he got arms
without any thanks unto thee.”  “By Heaven,” said Arianrod, “thou art a
wicked man.  Many a youth might have lost his life through the uproar
thou hast caused in this Cantrev to-day.  Now will I lay a destiny upon
this youth,” she said, “that he shall never have a wife of the race that
now inhabits this earth.”  “Verily,” said he, “thou wast ever a malicious
woman, and no one ought to support thee.  A wife shall he have
notwithstanding.”

They went thereupon unto Math the son of Mathonwy, and complained unto
him most bitterly of Arianrod.  Gwydion showed him also how he had
procured arms for the youth.  “Well,” said Math, “we will seek, I and
thou, by charms and illusion, to form a wife for him out of flowers.  He
has now come to man’s stature, and he is the comeliest youth that was
ever beheld.”  So they took the blossoms of the oak, and the blossoms of
the broom, and the blossoms of the meadow-sweet, and produced from them a
maiden, the fairest and most graceful that man ever saw.  And they
baptized her, and gave her the name of Blodeuwedd.

After she had become his bride, and they had feasted, said Gwydion, “It
is not easy for a man to maintain himself without possessions.”  “Of a
truth,” said Math, “I will give the young man the best Cantrev to hold.”
“Lord,” said he, “what Cantrev is that?”  “The Cantrev of Dinodig,” he
answered.  Now it is called at this day Eivionydd and Ardudwy.  And the
place in the Cantrev where he dwelt, was a palace of his in a spot called
Mur y Castell, on the confines of Ardudwy.  There dwelt he and reigned,
and both he and his sway were beloved by all.

One day he went forth to Caer Dathyl, to visit Math the son of Mathonwy.
And on the day that he set out for Caer Dathyl, Blodeuwedd walked in the
Court.  And she heard the sound of a horn.  And after the sound of the
horn, behold a tired stag went by, with dogs and huntsmen following it.
And after the dogs and the huntsmen there came a crowd of men on foot.
“Send a youth,” said she, “to ask who yonder host may be.”  So a youth
went, and inquired who they were.  “Gronw Pebyr is this, the lord of
Penllyn,” said they.  And thus the youth told her.

Gronw Pebyr pursued the stag, and by the river Cynvael he overtook the
stag and killed it.  And what with flaying the stag and baiting his dogs,
he was there until the night began to close in upon him.  And as the day
departed and the night drew near, he came to the gate of the Court.
“Verily,” said Blodeuwedd, “the Chieftain will speak ill of us if we let
him at this hour depart to another land without inviting him in.”  “Yes,
truly, lady,” said they, “it will be most fitting to invite him.”

Then went messengers to meet him and bid him in.  And he accepted her
bidding gladly, and came to the Court, and Blodeuwedd went to meet him,
and greeted him, and bade him welcome.  “Lady,” said he, “Heaven repay
thee thy kindness.”

When they had disaccoutred themselves, they went to sit down.  And
Blodeuwedd looked upon him, and from the moment that she looked on him
she became filled with his love.  And he gazed on her, and the same
thought came unto him as unto her, so that he could not conceal from her
that he loved her, but he declared unto her that he did so.  Thereupon
she was very joyful.  And all their discourse that night was concerning
the affection and love which they felt one for the other, and which in no
longer space than one evening had arisen.  And that evening passed they
in each other’s company.

The next day he sought to depart.  But she said, “I pray thee go not from
me to-day.”  And that night he tarried also.  And that night they
consulted by what means they might always be together.  “There is none
other counsel,” said he, “but that thou strive to learn from Llew Llaw
Gyffes in what manner he will meet his death.  And this must thou do
under the semblance of solicitude concerning him.”

The next day Gronw sought to depart.  “Verily,” said she, “I will counsel
thee not to go from me to-day.”  “At thy instance will I not go,” said
he, “albeit, I must say, there is danger that the chief who owns the
palace may return home.”  “To-morrow,” answered she, “will I indeed
permit thee to go forth.”

The next day he sought to go, and she hindered him not.  “Be mindful,”
said Gronw, “of what I have said unto thee, and converse with him fully,
and that under the guise of the dalliance of love, and find out by what
means he may come to his death.”

That night Llew Llaw Gyffes returned to his home.  And the day they spent
in discourse, and minstrelsy, and feasting.  And at night they went to
rest, and he spoke to Blodeuwedd once, and he spoke to her a second time.
But, for all this, he could not get from her one word.  “What aileth
thee?” said he, “art thou well?”  “I was thinking,” said she, “of that
which thou didst never think of concerning me; for I was sorrowful as to
thy death, lest thou shouldst go sooner than I.”  “Heaven reward thy care
for me,” said he, “but until Heaven take me I shall not easily be slain.”
“For the sake of Heaven, and for mine, show me how thou mightest be
slain.  My memory in guarding is better than thine.”  “I will tell thee
gladly,” said he.  “Not easily can I be slain, except by a wound.  And
the spear wherewith I am struck must be a year in the forming.  And
nothing must be done towards it except during the sacrifice on Sundays.”
“Is this certain?” asked she.  “It is in truth,” he answered.  “And I
cannot be slain within a house, nor without.  I cannot be slain on
horseback nor on foot.”  “Verily,” said she, “in what manner then canst
thou be slain?”  “I will tell thee,” said he.  “By making a bath for me
by the side of a river, and by putting a roof over the cauldron, and
thatching it well and tightly, and bringing a buck, and putting it beside
the cauldron.  Then if I place one foot on the buck’s back, and the other
on the edge of the cauldron, whosoever strikes me thus will cause my
death.”  “Well,” said she, “I thank Heaven that it will be easy to avoid
this.”

No sooner had she held this discourse than she sent to Gronw Pebyr.
Gronw toiled at making the spear, and that day twelvemonth it was ready.
And that very day he caused her to be informed thereof.

“Lord,” said Blodeuwedd unto Llew, “I have been thinking how it is
possible that what thou didst tell me formerly can be true; wilt thou
show me in what manner thou couldst stand at once upon the edge of a
cauldron and upon a buck, if I prepare the bath for thee?”  “I will show
thee,” said he.

Then she sent unto Gronw, and bade him be in ambush on the hill which is
now called Bryn Kyvergyr, on the bank of the river Cynvael.  She caused
also to be collected all the goats that were in the Cantrev, and had them
brought to the other side of the river, opposite Bryn Kyvergyr.

And the next day she spoke thus.  “Lord,” said she, “I have caused the
roof and the bath to be prepared, and lo! they are ready.”  “Well,” said
Llew, “we will go gladly to look at them.”

The day after they came and looked at the bath.  “Wilt thou go into the
bath, lord?” said she.  “Willingly will I go in,” he answered.  So into
the bath he went, and he anointed himself.  “Lord,” said she, “behold the
animals which thou didst speak of as being called bucks.”  “Well,” said
he, “cause one of them to be caught and brought here.”  And the buck was
brought.  Then Llew rose out of the bath, and put on his trowsers, and he
placed one foot on the edge of the bath and the other on the buck’s back.

Thereupon Gronw rose up from the bill which is called Bryn Kyvergyr, and
he rested on one knee, and flung the poisoned dart and struck him on the
side, so that the shaft started out, but the head of the dart remained
in.  Then he flew up in the form of an eagle and gave a fearful scream.
And thenceforth was he no more seen.

As soon as he departed Gronw and Blodeuwedd went together unto the palace
that night.  And the next day Gronw arose and took possession of Ardudwy.
And after he had overcome the land, he ruled over it, so that Ardudwy and
Penllyn were both under his sway.

Then these tidings reached Math the son of Mathonwy.  And heaviness and
grief came upon Math, and much more upon Gwydion than upon him.  “Lord,”
said Gwydion, “I shall never rest until I have tidings of my nephew.”
“Verily,” said Math, “may Heaven be thy strength.”  Then Gwydion set
forth and began to go forward.  And he went through Gwynedd and Powys to
the confines.  And when he had done so, he went into Arvon, and came to
the house of a vassal, in Maenawr Penardd.  And he alighted at the house,
and stayed there that night.  The man of the house and his house-hold
came in, and last of all came there the swineherd.  Said the man of the
house to the swineherd, “Well, youth, hath thy sow come in to-night?”
“She hath,” said he, “and is this instant returned to the pigs.”  “Where
doth this sow go to?” said Gwydion.  “Every day, when the sty is opened,
she goeth forth and none can catch sight of her, neither is it known
whither she goeth more than if she sank into the earth.”  “Wilt thou
grant unto me,” said Gwydion, “not to open the sty until I am beside the
sty with thee?”  “This will I do, right gladly,” he answered.

That night they went to rest; and as soon as the swineherd saw the light
of day, he awoke Gwydion.  And Gwydion arose and dressed himself, and
went with the swineherd, and stood beside the sty.  Then the swineherd
opened the sty.  And as soon as he opened it, behold she leaped forth,
and set off with great speed.  And Gwydion followed her, and she went
against the course of a river, and made for a brook, which is now called
Nant y Llew.  And there she halted and began feeding.  And Gwydion came
under the tree, and looked what it might be that the sow was feeding on.
And he saw that she was eating putrid flesh and vermin.  Then looked he
up to the top of the tree, and as he looked he beheld on the top of the
tree an eagle, and when the eagle shook itself, there fell vermin and
putrid flesh from off it, and these the sow devoured.  And it seemed to
him that the eagle was Llew.  And he sang an Englyn:—

   “Oak that grows between the two banks;
   Darkened is the sky and hill!
   Shall I not tell him by his wounds,
   That this is Llew?”

Upon this the eagle came down until he reached the centre of the tree.
And Gwydion sang another Englyn:—

   “Oak that grows in upland ground,
   Is it not wetted by the rain?  Has it not been drenched
   By nine score tempests?
   It bears in its branches Llew Llaw Gyffes!”

Then the eagle came down until he was on the lowest branch of the tree,
and thereupon this Englyn did Gwydion sing:—

   “Oak that grows beneath the steep;
   Stately and majestic is its aspect!
   Shall I not speak it?
   That Llew will come to my lap?”

And the eagle came down upon Gwydion’s knee.  And Gwydion struck him with
his magic wand, so that he returned to his own form.  No one ever saw a
more piteous sight, for he was nothing but skin and bone.

Then he went unto Caer Dathyl, and there were brought unto him good
physicians that were in Gwynedd, and before the end of the year he was
quite healed.

“Lord,” said he unto Math the son of Mathonwy, “it is full time now that
I have retribution of him by whom I have suffered all this woe.”
“Truly,” said Math, “he will never be able to maintain himself in the
possession of that which is thy right.”  “Well,” said Llew, “the sooner I
have my right, the better shall I be pleased.”

Then they called together the whole of Gwynedd, and set forth to Ardudwy.
And Gwydion went on before and proceeded to Mur y Castell.  And when
Blodeuwedd heard that he was coming, she took her maidens with her, and
fled to the mountain.  And they passed through the river Cynvael, and
went towards a court that there was upon the mountain, and through fear
they could not proceed except with their faces looking backwards, so that
unawares they fell into the lake.  And they were all drowned except
Blodeuwedd herself, and her Gwydion overtook.  And he said unto her, “I
will not slay thee, but I will do unto thee worse than that.  For I will
turn thee into a bird; and because of the shame thou hast done unto Llew
Llaw Gyffes, thou shalt never show thy face in the light of day
henceforth; and that through fear of all the other birds.  For it shall
be their nature to attack thee, and to chase thee from wheresoever they
may find thee.  And thou shalt not lose thy name, but shalt be always
called Blodeuwedd.”  Now Blodeuwedd is an owl in the language of this
present time, and for this reason is the owl hateful unto all birds.  And
even now the owl is called Blodeuwedd.

Then Gronw Pebyr withdrew unto Penllyn, and he dispatched thence an
embassy.  And the messengers he sent asked Llew Llaw Gyffes if he would
take land, or domain, or gold, or silver, for the injury he had received.
“I will not, by my confession to Heaven,” said he.  “Behold this is the
least that I will accept from him; that he come to the spot where I was
when he wounded me with the dart, and that I stand where he did, and that
with a dart I take my aim at him.  And this is the very least that I will
accept.”

And this was told unto Gronw Pebyr.  “Verily,” said he, “is it needful
for me to do thus?  My faithful warriors, and my household, and my
foster-brothers, is there not one among you who will stand the blow in my
stead?”  “There is not, verily,” answered they.  And because of their
refusal to suffer one stroke for their lord, they are called the third
disloyal tribe even unto this day.  “Well,” said he, “I will meet it.”

Then they two went forth to the banks of the river Cynvael, and Gronw
stood in the place where Llew Llaw Gyffes was when he struck him, and
Llew in the place where Gronw was.  Then said Gronw Pebyr unto Llew,
“Since it was through the wiles of a woman that I did unto thee as I have
done, I adjure thee by Heaven to let me place between me and the blow,
the slab thou seest yonder on the river’s bank.”  “Verily,” said Llew, “I
will not refuse thee this.”  “Ah,” said he, “may Heaven reward thee.”  So
Gronw took the slab and placed it between him and the blow.

Then Llew flung the dart at him, and it pierced the slab and went through
Gronw likewise, so that it pierced through his back.  And thus was Gronw
Pebyr slain.  And there is still the slab on the bank of the river
Cynvael, in Ardudwy, having the hole through it.  And therefore is it
even now called Llech Gronw.

A second time did Llew Llaw Gyffes take possession of the land, and
prosperously did he govern it.  And, as the story relates, he was lord
after this over Gwynedd.  And thus ends this portion of the Mabinogi.




THE DREAM OF MAXEN WLEDIG


MAXEN WLEDIG was emperor of Rome, and he was a comelier man, and a better
and a wiser than any emperor that had been before him.  And one day he
held a council of kings, and he said to his friends, “I desire to go
to-morrow to hunt.”  And the next day in the morning he set forth with
his retinue, and came to the valley of the river that flowed towards
Rome.  And he hunted through the valley until mid-day.  And with him also
were two-and-thirty crowned kings, that were his vassals; not for the
delight of hunting went the emperor with them, but to put himself on
equal terms with those kings.

And the sun was high in the sky over their heads and the heat was great.
And sleep came upon Maxen Wledig.  And his attendants stood and set up
their shields around him upon the shafts of their spears to protect him
from the sun, and they placed a gold enamelled shield under his head; and
so Maxen slept.

And he saw a dream.  And this is the dream that he saw.  He was
journeying along the valley of the river towards its source; and he came
to the highest mountain in the world.  And he thought that the mountain
was as high as the sky; and when he came over the mountain, it seemed to
him that he went through the fairest and most level regions that man ever
yet beheld, on the other side of the mountain.  And he saw large and
mighty rivers descending from the mountain to the sea, and towards the
mouths of the rivers he proceeded.  And as he journeyed thus, he came to
the mouth of the largest river ever seen.  And he beheld a great city at
the entrance of the river, and a vast castle in the city, and he saw many
high towers of various colours in the castle.  And he saw a fleet at the
mouth of the river, the largest ever seen.  And he saw one ship among the
fleet; larger was it by far, and fairer than all the others.  Of such
part of the ship as he could see above the water, one plank was gilded
and the other silvered over.  He saw a bridge of the bone of a whale from
the ship to the land, and he thought that he went along the bridge, and
came into the ship.  And a sail was hoisted on the ship, and along the
sea and the ocean was it borne.  Then it seemed that he came to the
fairest island in the whole world, and he traversed the island from sea
to sea, even to the furthest shore of the island.  Valleys he saw, and
steeps, and rocks of wondrous height, and rugged precipices.  Never yet
saw he the like.  And thence he beheld an island in the sea, facing this
rugged land.  And between him and this island was a country of which the
plain was as large as the sea, the mountain as vast as the wood.  And
from the mountain he saw a river that flowed through the land and fell
into the sea.  And at the mouth of the river he beheld a castle, the
fairest that man ever saw, and the gate of the castle was open, and he
went into the castle.  And in the castle he saw a fair hall, of which the
roof seemed to be all gold, the walls of the hall seemed to be entirely
of glittering precious gems, the doors all seemed to be of gold.  Golden
seats he saw in the hall, and silver tables.  And on a seat opposite to
him he beheld two auburn-haired youths playing at chess.  He saw a silver
board for the chess, and golden pieces thereon.  The garments of the
youths were of jet-black satin, and chaplets of ruddy gold bound their
hair, whereon were sparkling jewels of great price, rubies, and gems,
alternately with imperial stones.  Buskins of new Cordovan leather on
their feet, fastened by slides of red gold.

And beside a pillar in the hall he saw a hoary-headed man, in a chair of
ivory, with the figures of two eagles of ruddy gold thereon.  Bracelets
of gold were upon his arms, and many rings were on his hands, and a
golden torque about his neck; and his hair was bound with a golden
diadem.  He was of powerful aspect.  A chessboard of gold was before him,
and a rod of gold, and a steel file in his hand.  And he was carving out
chessmen.

And he saw a maiden sitting before him in a chair of ruddy gold.  Not
more easy than to gaze upon the sun when brightest, was it to look upon
her by reason of her beauty.  A vest of white silk was upon the maiden,
with clasps of red gold at the breast; and a surcoat of gold tissue upon
her, and a frontlet of red gold upon her head, and rubies and gems were
in the frontlet, alternating with pearls and imperial stones.  And a
girdle of ruddy gold was around her.  She was the fairest sight that man
ever beheld.

The maiden arose from her chair before him, and he threw his arms about
the neck of the maiden, and they two sat down together in the chair of
gold: and the chair was not less roomy for them both, than for the maiden
alone.  And as he had his arms about the maiden’s neck, and his cheek by
her cheek, behold, through the chafing of the dogs at their leashing, and
the clashing of the shields as they struck against each other, and the
beating together of the shafts of the spears, and the neighing of the
horses and their prancing, the emperor awoke.

And when he awoke, nor spirit nor existence was left him, because of the
maiden whom he had seen in his sleep, for the love of the maiden pervaded
his whole frame.  Then his household spake unto him.  “Lord,” said they,
“is it not past the time for thee to take thy food?”  Thereupon the
emperor mounted his palfrey, the saddest man that mortal ever saw, and
went forth towards Rome.

And thus he was during the space of a week.  When they of the household
went to drink wine and mead out of golden vessels, he went not with any
of them.  When they went to listen to songs and tales, he went not with
them there; neither could he be persuaded to do anything but sleep.  And
as often as he slept, he beheld in his dreams the maiden he loved best;
but except when he slept he saw nothing of her, for he knew not where in
the world she was.

One day the page of the chamber spake unto him; now, although he was page
of the chamber, he was king of the Romans.  “Lord,” said he, “all the
people revile thee.”  “Wherefore do they revile me?” asked the emperor.
“Because they can get neither message nor answer from thee as men should
have from their lord.  This is the cause why thou art spoken evil of.”
“Youth,” said the emperor, “do thou bring unto me the wise men of Rome,
and I will tell them wherefore I am sorrowful.”

Then the wise men of Rome were brought to the emperor, and he spake to
them.  “Sages of Rome,” said he, “I have seen a dream.  And in the dream
I beheld a maiden, and because of the maiden is there neither life, nor
spirit, nor existence within me.”  “Lord,” they answered, “since thou
judgest us worthy to counsel thee, we will give thee counsel.  And this
is our counsel; that thou send messengers for three years to the three
parts of the world to seek for thy dream.  And as thou knowest not what
day or what night good news may come to thee, the hope thereof will
support thee.”

So the messengers journeyed for the space of a year, wandering about the
world, and seeking tidings concerning his dream.  But when they came back
at the end of the year, they knew not one word more than they did the day
they set forth.  And then was the emperor exceeding sorrowful, for he
thought that he should never have tidings of her whom best he loved.

Then spoke the king of the Romans unto the emperor.  “Lord,” said he, “go
forth to hunt by the way thou didst seem to go, whether it were to the
east, or to the west.”  So the emperor went forth to the hunt, and he
came to the bank of the river.  “Behold,” said he, “this is where I was
when I saw the dream, and I went towards the source of the river
westward.”

And thereupon thirteen messengers of the emperor’s set forth, and before
them they saw a high mountain, which seemed to them to touch the sky.
Now this was the guise in which the messengers journeyed; one sleeve was
on the cap of each of them in front, as a sign that they were messengers,
in order that through what hostile land soever they might pass no harm
might be done them.  And when they were come over this mountain, they
beheld vast plains, and large rivers flowing there through.

“Behold,” said they, “the land which our master saw.”

And they went along the mouths of the rivers, until they came to the
mighty river which they saw flowing to the sea, and the vast city, and
the many-coloured high towers in the castle.  They saw the largest fleet
in the world, in the harbour of the river, and one ship that was larger
than any of the others.  “Behold again,” said they, “the dream that our
master saw.”  And in the great ship they crossed the sea, and came to the
Island of Britain.  And they traversed the island until they came to
Snowdon.  “Behold,” said they, “the rugged land that our master saw.”
And they went forward until they saw Anglesey before them, and until they
saw Arvon likewise.  “Behold,” said they, “the land our master saw in his
sleep.”  And they saw Aber Sain, and a castle at the mouth of the river.
The portal of the castle saw they open, and into the castle they went,
and they saw a hall in the castle.  Then said they, “Behold, the hall
which he saw in his sleep.”  They went into the hall, and they beheld two
youths playing at chess on the golden bench.  And they beheld the
hoary-headed man beside the pillar, in the ivory chair, carving chessmen.
And they beheld the maiden sitting on a chair of ruddy gold.

The messengers bent down upon their knees.  “Empress of Rome, all hail!”
“Ha, gentles,” said the maiden, “ye bear the seeming of honourable men,
and the badge of envoys, what mockery is this ye do to me?”  “We mock
thee not, lady; but the Emperor of Rome hath seen thee in his sleep, and
he has neither life nor spirit left because of thee.  Thou shalt have of
us therefore the choice, lady, whether thou wilt go with us and be made
empress of Rome, or that the emperor come hither and take thee for his
wife?”  “Ha, lords,” said the maiden, “I will not deny what ye say,
neither will I believe it too well.  If the emperor love me, let him come
here to seek me.”

And by day and night the messengers hied them back.  And when their
horses failed, they bought other fresh ones.  And when they came to Rome,
they saluted the emperor, and asked their boon, which was given to them
according as they named it.  “We will be thy guides, lord,” said they,
“over sea and over land, to the place where is the woman whom best thou
lovest, for we know her name, and her kindred, and her race.”

And immediately the emperor set forth with his army.  And these men were
his guides.  Towards the Island of Britain they went over the sea and the
deep.  And he conquered the Island from Beli the son of Manogan, and his
sons, and drove them to the sea, and went forward even unto Arvon.  And
the emperor knew the land when he saw it.  And when he beheld the castle
of Aber Sain, “Look yonder,” said he, “there is the castle wherein I saw
the damsel whom I best love.”  And he went forward into the castle and
into the hall, and there he saw Kynan the son of Eudav, and Adeon the son
of Eudav, playing at chess.  And he saw Eudav the son of Caradawc,
sitting on a chair of ivory carving chessmen.  And the maiden whom he had
beheld in his sleep, he saw sitting on a chair of gold.  “Empress of
Rome,” said he, “all hail!”  And the emperor threw his arms about her
neck; and that night she became his bride.

And the next day in the morning, the damsel asked her maiden portion.
And he told her to name what she would.  And she asked to have the Island
of Britain for her father, from the Channel to the Irish Sea, together
with the three adjacent Islands, to hold under the empress of Rome; and
to have three chief castles made for her, an whatever places she might
choose in the Island of Britain.  And she chose to have the highest
castle made at Arvon.  And they brought thither earth from Rome that it
might be more healthful for the emperor to sleep, and sit, and walk upon.
After that the two other castles were made for her, which were Caerlleon
and Caermarthen.

And one day the emperor went to hunt at Caermarthen, and he came so far
as the top of Brevi Vawr, and there the emperor pitched his tent.  And
that encamping place is called Cadeir Maxen, even to this day.  And
because that he built the castle with a myriad of men, he called it
Caervyrddin.  Then Helen bethought her to make high roads from one castle
to another throughout the Island of Britain.  And the roads were made.
And for this cause are they called the roads of Helen Luyddawc, that she
was sprung from a native of this island, and the men of the Island of
Britain would not have made these great roads for any save for her.

Seven years did the emperor tarry in this Island.  Now, at that time, the
men of Rome had a custom, that whatsoever emperor should remain in other
lands more than seven years should remain to his own overthrow, and
should never return to Rome again.

So they made a new emperor.  And this one wrote a letter of threat to
Maxen.  There was nought in the letter but only this.  “If thou comest,
and if thou ever comest to Rome.”  And even unto Caerlleon came this
letter to Maxen, and these tidings.  Then sent he a letter to the man who
styled himself emperor in Rome.  There was nought in that letter also but
only this.  “If I come to Rome, and if I come.”

And thereupon Maxen set forth towards Rome with his army, and vanquished
France and Bugundy, and every land on the way, and sat down before the
city of Rome.

A year was the emperor before the city, and he was no nearer taking it
than the first day.  And after him there came the brothers of Helen
Luyddawc from the Island of Britain, and a small host with them, and
better warriors were in that small host than twice as many Romans.  And
the emperor was told that a host was seen, halting close to his army and
encamping, and no man ever saw a fairer or better appointed host for its
size, nor more handsome standards.

And Helen went to see the hosts, and she knew the standards of her
brothers.  Then came Kynan the son of Eudav, and Adeon the son of Eudav,
to meet the emperor.  And the emperor was glad because of them, and
embraced them.

Then they looked at the Romans as they attacked the city.  Said Kynan to
his brother, “We will try to attack the city more expertly than this.”
So they measured by night the height of the wall, and they sent their
carpenters to the wood, and a ladder was made for every four men of their
number.  Now when these were ready, every day at mid-day the emperors
went to meat, and they ceased to fight on both sides till all had
finished eating.  And in the morning the men of Britain took their food
and they drank until they were invigorated.  And while the two emperors
were at meat, the Britons came to the city, and placed their ladders
against it, and forthwith they came in through the city.

The new emperor had no time to arm himself when they fell upon him, and
slew him, and many others with him.  And three nights and three days were
they subduing the men that were in the city and taking the castle.  And
others of them kept the city, lest any of the host of Maxen should come
therein, until they had subjected all to their will.

Then spake Maxen to Helen Luyddawc.  “I marvel, lady,” said he, “that thy
brothers have not conquered this city for me.”  “Lord, emperor,” she
answered, “the wisest youths in the world are my brothers.  Go thou
thither and ask the city of them, and if it be in their possession thou
shalt have it gladly.”  So the emperor and Helen went and demanded the
city.  And they told the emperor that none had taken the city, and that
none could give it him, but the men of the Island of Britain.  Then the
gates of the city of Rome were opened, and the emperor sat on the throne,
and all the men of Rome submitted them selves unto him.

The emperor then said unto Kynan and Adeon, “Lords,” said he, “I have now
had possession of the whole of my empire.  This host give I unto you to
vanquish whatever region ye may desire in the world.”

So they set forth and conquered lands, and castles, and cities.  And they
slew all the men, but the women they kept alive.  And thus they continued
until the young men that had come with them were grown grey-headed, from
the length of time they were upon this conquest.

Then spoke Kynan unto Adeon his brother, “Whether wilt thou rather,” said
he, “tarry in this land, or go back into the land whence thou didst come
forth?”  Now he chose to go back to his own land, and many with him.  But
Kynan tarried there with the other part and dwelt there.

And they took counsel and cut out the tongues of the women, lest they
should corrupt their speech.  And because of the silence of the women
from their own speech, the men of Armorica are called Britons.  From that
time there came frequently, and still comes, that language from the
Island of Britain.

And this dream is called the Dream of Maxen Wledig, emperor of Rome.  And
here it ends.




HERE IS THE STORY OF LLUDD AND LLEVELYS


BELI THE GREAT, the son of Manogan, had three sons, Lludd, and
Caswallawn, and Nynyaw; and according to the story he had a fourth son
called Llevelys.  And after the death of Beli, the kingdom of the Island
of Britain fell into the hands of Llud his eldest son; and Lludd ruled
prosperously, and rebuilt the walls of London, and encompassed it about
with numberless towers.  And after that he bade the citizens build houses
therein, such as no houses in the kingdoms could equal.  And moreover he
was a mighty warrior, and generous and liberal in giving meat and drink
to all that sought them.  And though he had many castles and cities this
one loved he more than any.  And he dwelt therein most part of the year,
and therefore was it called Caer Lludd, and at last Caer London.  And
after the stranger-race came there, it was called London, or Lwndrys.

Lludd loved Llevelys best of all his brothers, because he was a wise and
discreet man.  Having heard that the king of France had died, leaving no
heir except a daughter, and that he had left all his possessions in her
hands, he came to Lludd his brother, to beseech his counsel and aid.  And
that not so much for his own welfare, as to seek to add to the glory and
honour and dignity of his kindred, if he might go to France to woo the
maiden for his wife.  And forthwith his brother conferred with him, and
this counsel was pleasing unto him.

So he prepared ships and filled them with armed knights, and set forth
towards France.  And as soon as they had landed, they sent messengers to
show the nobles of France the cause of the embassy.  And by the joint
counsel of the nobles of France and of the princes, the maiden was given
to Llevelys, and the crown of the kingdom with her.  And thenceforth he
ruled the land discreetly, and wisely, and happily, as long as his life
lasted.

After a space of time had passed, three plagues fell on the Island of
Britain, such as none in the islands had ever seen the like of.  The
first was a certain race that came, and was called the Coranians; and so
great was their knowledge, that there was no discourse upon the face of
the Island, however low it might be spoken, but what, if the wind met it,
it was known to them.  And through this they could not be injured. {4}

The second plague was a shriek which came on every May-eve, over every
hearth in the Island of Britain.  And this went through people’s hearts,
and so scared them, that the men lost their hue and their strength, and
the women their children, and the young men and the maidens lost their
senses, and all the animals and trees and the earth and the waters, were
left barren.

The third plague was, that however much of provisions and food might be
prepared in the king’s courts, were there even so much as a year’s
provision of meat and drink, none of it could ever be found, except what
was consumed in the first night.  And two of these plagues, no one ever
knew their cause, therefore was there better hope of being freed from the
first than from the second and third.

And thereupon King Lludd felt great sorrow and care, because that he knew
not how he might be freed from these plagues.  And he called to him all
the nobles of his kingdom, and asked counsel of them what they should do
against these afflictions.  And by the common counsel of the nobles,
Lludd the son of Beli went to Llevelys his brother, king of France, for
he was a man great of counsel and wisdom, to seek his advice.

And they made ready a fleet, and that in secret and in silence, lest that
race should know the cause of their errand, or any besides the king and
his counsellors.  And when they were made ready, they went into their
ships, Lludd and those whom he chose with him.  And they began to cleave
the seas towards France.

And when these tidings came to Llevelys, seeing that he knew not the
cause of his brother’s ships, he came on the other side to meet him, and
with him was a fleet vast of size.  And when Lludd saw this, he left all
the ships out upon the sea except one only; and in that one he came to
meet his brother, and he likewise with a single ship came to meet him.
And when they were come together, each put his arms about the other’s
neck, and they welcomed each other with brotherly love.

After that Lludd had shown his brother the cause of his errand, Llevelys
said that he himself knew the cause of the coming to those lands.  And
they took counsel together to discourse on the matter otherwise than
thus, in order that the wind might not catch their words, nor the
Coranians know what they might say.  Then Llevelys caused a long horn to
be made of brass, and through this horn they discoursed.  But whatsoever
words they spoke through this horn, one to the other, neither of them
could hear any other but harsh and hostile words.  And when Llevelys saw
this, and that there was a demon thwarting them and disturbing through
this horn, he caused wine to be put therein to wash it.  And through the
virtue of the wine the demon was driven out of the horn.  And when their
discourse was unobstructed, Llevelys told his brother that he would give
him some insects whereof he should keep some to breed, lest by chance the
like affliction might come a second time.  And other of these insects he
should take and bruise in water.  And he assured him that it would have
power to destroy the race of the Coranians.  That is to say, that when he
came home to his kingdom he should call together all the people both of
his own race and of the race of the Coranians for a conference, as though
with the intent of making peace between them; and that when they were all
together, he should take this charmed water, and cast it over all alike.
And he assured him that the water would poison the race of the Coranians,
but that it would not slay or harm those of his own race.

“And the second plague,” said he, “that is in thy dominion, behold it is
a dragon.  And another dragon of a foreign race is fighting with it, and
striving to overcome it.  And therefore does your dragon make a fearful
outcry.  And on this wise mayest thou come to know this.  After thou hast
returned home, cause the Island to be measured in its length and breadth,
and in the place where thou dost find the exact central point, there
cause a pit to be dug, and cause a cauldron full of the best mead that
can be made to be put in the pit, with a covering of satin over the face
of the cauldron.  And then, in thine own person do thou remain there
watching, and thou wilt see the dragon fighting in the form of terrific
animals.  And at length they will take the form of dragons in the air.
And last of all, after wearying themselves with fierce and furious
fighting, they will fall in the form of two pigs upon the covering, and
they will sink in, and the covering with them, and they will draw it down
to the very bottom of the cauldron.  And they will drink up the whole of
the mead; and after that they will sleep.  Thereupon do thou immediately
fold the covering around them, and bury them in a kistvaen, in the
strongest place thou hast in thy dominions, and hide them in the earth.
And as long as they shall bide in that strong place no plague shall come
to the Island of Britain from elsewhere.

“The cause of the third plague,” said he, “is a mighty man of magic, who
take thy meat and thy drink and thy store.  And he through illusions and
charms causes every one to sleep.  Therefore it is needful for thee in
thy own person to watch thy food and thy provisions.  And lest he should
overcome thee with sleep, be there a cauldron of cold water by thy side,
and when thou art oppressed with sleep, plunge into the cauldron.”

Then Lludd returned back unto his land.  And immediately he summoned to
him the whole of his own race and of the Coranians.  And as Llevelys had
taught him, he bruised the insects in water, the which he cast over them
all together, and forthwith it destroyed the whole tribe of the
Coranians, without hurt to any of the Britons.

And some time after this, Lludd caused the Island to be measured in its
length and in its breadth.  And in Oxford he found the central point, and
in that place he caused the earth to be dug, and in that pit a cauldron
to be set, full of the best mead that could be made, and a covering of
satin over the face of it.  And he himself watched that night.  And while
he was there, he beheld the dragons fighting.  And when they were weary
they fell, and came down upon the top of the satin, and drew it with them
to the bottom of the cauldron.  And when they had drunk the mead they
slept.  And in their sleep, Lludd folded the covering around them, and in
the securest place he had in Snowdon, he hid them in a kistvaen.  Now
after that this spot was called Dinas Emreis, but before that, Dinas
Ffaraon.  And thus the fierce outcry ceased in his dominions.

And when this was ended, King Lludd caused an exceeding great banquet to
be prepared.  And when it was ready, he placed a vessel of cold water by
his side, and he in his own proper person watched it.  And as he abode
thus clad with arms, about the third watch of the night, lo, he heard
many surpassing fascinations and various songs.  And drowsiness urged him
to sleep.  Upon this, lest he should be hindered from his purpose and be
overcome by sleep, he went often into the water.  And at last, behold, a
man of vast size, clad in strong, heavy armour, came in, bearing a
hamper.  And, as he was wont, he put all the food and provisions of meat
and drink into the hamper, and proceeded to go with it forth.  And
nothing was ever more wonderful to Lludd, than that the hamper should
hold so much.

And thereupon King Lludd went after him and spoke unto him thus.  “Stop,
stop,” said he, “though thou hast done many insults and much spoil
erewhile, thou shalt not do so any more, unless thy skill in arms and thy
prowess be greater than mine.”

Then he instantly put down the hamper on the floor, and awaited him.  And
a fierce encounter was between them, so that the glittering fire flew out
from their arms.  And at the last Lludd grappled with him, and fate
bestowed the victory on Lludd.  And he threw the plague to the earth.
And after he had overcome him by strength and might, he besought his
mercy.  “How can I grant thee mercy,” said the king, “after all the many
injuries and wrongs that thou hast done me?”  “All the losses that ever I
have caused thee,” said he, “I will make thee atonement for, equal to
what I have taken.  And I will never do the like from this time forth.
But thy faithful vassal will I be.”  And the king accepted this from him.

And thus Lludd freed the Island of Britain from the three plagues.  And
from thenceforth until the end of his life, in prosperous peace did Lludd
the son of Beli rule the Island of Britain.  And this Tale is called the
Story of Lludd and Llevelys.  And thus it ends.




TALIESIN


IN times past there lived in Penllyn a man of gentle lineage, named Tegid
Voel, and his dwelling was in the midst of the lake Tegid, and his wife
was called Caridwen.  And there was born to him of his wife a son named
Morvran ab Tegid, and also a daughter named Creirwy, the fairest maiden
in the world was she; and they had a brother, the most ill-favoured man
in the world, Avagddu.  Now Caridwen his mother thought that he was not
likely to be admitted among men of noble birth, by reason of his
ugliness, unless he had some exalted merits or knowledge.  For it was in
the beginning of Arthur’s time and of the Round Table.

So she resolved, according to the arts of the books of the Fferyllt, to
boil a cauldron of Inspiration and Science for her son, that his
reception might be honourable because of his knowledge of the mysteries
of the future state of the world.

Then she began to boil the cauldron, which from the beginning of its
boiling might not cease to boil for a year and a day, until three blessed
drops were obtained of the grace of Inspiration.

And she put Gwion Bach the son of Gwreang of Llanfair in Caereinion, in
Powys, to stir the cauldron, and a blind man named Morda to kindle the
fire beneath it, and she charged them that they should not suffer it to
cease boiling for the space of a year and a day.  And she herself,
according to the books of the astronomers, and in planetary hours,
gathered every day of all charm-bearing herbs.  And one day, towards the
end of the year, as Caridwen was culling plants and making incantations,
it chanced that three drops of the charmed liquor flew out of the
cauldron and fell upon the finger of Gwion Bach.  And by reason of their
great heat he put his finger to his mouth, and the instant he put those
marvel-working drops into his mouth, he foresaw everything that was to
come, and perceived that his chief care must be to guard against the
wiles of Caridwen, for vast was her skill.  And in very great fear he
fled towards his own land.  And the cauldron burst in two, because all
the liquor within it except the three charm-bearing drops was poisonous,
so that the horses of Gwyddno Garanhir were poisoned by the water of the
stream into which the liquor of the cauldron ran, and the confluence of
that stream was called the Poison of the Horses of Gwyddno from that time
forth.

Thereupon came in Caridwen and saw all the toil of the whole year lost.
And she seized a billet of wood and struck the blind Morda on the head
until one of his eyes fell out upon his cheek.  And he said, “Wrongfully
hast thou disfigured me, for I am innocent.  Thy loss was not because of
me.”  “Thou speakest truth,” said Caridwen, “it was Gwion Bach who robbed
me.”

And she went forth after him, running.  And he saw her, and changed
himself into a hare and fled.  But she changed herself into a greyhound
and turned him.  And he ran towards a river, and became a fish.  And she
in the form of an otter-bitch chased him under the water, until he was
fain to turn himself into a bird of the air.  She, as a hawk, followed
him and gave him no rest in the sky.  And just as she was about to stoop
upon him, and he was in fear of death, he espied a heap of winnowed wheat
on the floor of a barn, and he dropped among the wheat, and turned
himself into one of the grains.  Then she transformed herself into a
high-crested black hen, and went to the wheat and scratched it with her
feet, and found him out and swallowed him.  And, as the story says, she
bore him nine months, and when she was delivered of him, she could not
find it in her heart to kill him, by reason of his beauty.  So she
wrapped him in a leathern bag, and cast him into the sea to the mercy of
God, on the twenty-ninth day of April.

And at that time the weir of Gwyddno was on the strand between Dyvi and
Aberystwyth, near to his own castle, and the value of an hundred pounds
was taken in that weir every May eve.  And in those days Gwyddno had an
only son named Elphin, the most hapless of youths, and the most needy.
And it grieved his father sore, for he thought that he was born in an
evil hour.  And by the advice of his council, his father had granted him
the drawing of the weir that year, to see if good luck would ever befall
him, and to give him something wherewith to begin the world.

And the next day when Elphin went to look, there was nothing in the weir.
But as he turned back he perceived the leathern bag upon a pole of the
weir.  Then said one of the weir-ward unto Elphin, “Thou wast never
unlucky until to-night, and now thou hast destroyed the virtues of the
weir, which always yielded the value of an hundred pounds every May eve,
and to-night there is nothing but this leathern skin within it.”  “How
now,” said Elphin, “there may be therein the value of an hundred pounds.”
Well, they took up the leathern bag, and he who opened it saw the
forehead of the boy, and said to Elphin, “Behold a radiant brow!” {6}
“Taliesin be he called,” said Elphin.  And he lifted the boy in his arms,
and lamenting his mischance, he placed him sorrowfully behind him.  And
he made his horse amble gently, that before had been trotting, and he
carried him as softly as if he had been sitting in the easiest chair in
the world.  And presently the boy made a Consolation and praise to
Elphin, and foretold honour to Elphin; and the Consolation was as you may
see:—

   “Fair Elphin, cease to lament!
   Let no one be dissatisfied with his own,
   To despair will bring no advantage.
   No man sees what supports him;
   The prayer of Cynllo will not be in vain;
   God will not violate his promise.
   Never in Gwyddno’s weir
   Was there such good luck as this night.
   Fair Elphin, dry thy cheeks!
   Being too sad will not avail.
   Although thou thinkest thou hast no gain,
   Too much grief will bring thee no good;
   Nor doubt the miracles of the Almighty:
   Although I am but little, I am highly gifted.
   From seas, and from mountains,
   And from the depths of rivers,
   God brings wealth to the fortunate man.
   Elphin of lively qualities,
   Thy resolution is unmanly;
   Thou must not be over sorrowful:
   Better to trust in God than to forbode ill.
   Weak and small as I am,
   On the foaming beach of the ocean,
   In the day of trouble I shall be
   Of more service to thee than three hundred salmon.
   Elphin of notable qualities,
   Be not displeased at thy misfortune;
   Although reclined thus weak in my bag,
   There lies a virtue in my tongue.
   While I continue thy protector
   Thou hast not much to fear;
   Remembering the names of the Trinity,
   None shall be able to harm thee.”

And this was the first poem that Taliesin ever sang, being to console
Elphin in his grief for that the produce of the weir was lost, and, what
was worse, that all the world would consider that it was through his
fault and ill-luck.  And then Gwyddno Garanhir {7} asked him what he was,
whether man or spirit.  Whereupon he sang this tale, and said:—

   “First, I have been formed a comely person,
   In the court of Caridwen I have done penance;
   Though little I was seen, placidly received,
   I was great on the floor of the place to where I was led;
   I have been a prized defence, the sweet muse the cause,
   And by law without speech I have been liberated
   By a smiling black old hag, when irritated
   Dreadful her claim when pursued:
   I have fled with vigour, I have fled as a frog,
   I have fled in the semblance of a crow, scarcely finding rest;
   I have fled vehemently, I have fled as a chain,
   I have fled as a roe into an entangled thicket;
   I have fled as a wolf cub, I have fled as a wolf in a wilderness,
   I have fled as a thrush of portending language;
   I have fled as a fox, used to concurrent bounds of quirks;
   I have fled as a martin, which did not avail;
   I have fled as a squirrel, that vainly hides,
   I have fled as a stag’s antler, of ruddy course,
   I have fled as iron in a glowing fire,
   I have fled as a spear-head, of woe to such as has a wish for it;
   I have fled as a fierce hull bitterly fighting,
   I have fled as a bristly boar seen in a ravine,
   I have fled as a white grain of pure wheat,
   On the skirt of a hempen sheet entangled,
   That seemed of the size of a mare’s foal,
   That is filling like a ship on the waters;
   Into a dark leathern bag I was thrown,
   And on a boundless sea I was sent adrift;
   Which was to me an omen of being tenderly nursed,
   And the Lord God then set me at liberty.”

Then came Elphin to the house or court of Gwyddno his father, and
Taliesin with him.  And Gwyddno asked him if he had had a good haul at
the weir, and he told him that he had got that which was better than
fish.  “What was that?” said Gwyddno.  “A Bard,” answered Elphin.  Then
said Gwyddno, “Alas, what will he profit thee?”  And Taliesin himself
replied and said, “He will profit him more than the weir ever profited
thee.”  Asked Gwyddno, “Art thou able to speak, and thou so little?”  And
Taliesin answered him, “I am better able to speak than thou to question
me.”  “Let me hear what thou canst say,” quoth Gwyddno.  Then Taliesin
sang:—

   “In water there is a quality endowed with a blessing;
   On God it is most just to meditate aright;
   To God it is proper to supplicate with seriousness,
   Since no obstacle can there be to obtain a reward from him.
   Three times have I been born, I know by meditation;
   It were miserable for a person not to come and obtain
   All the sciences of the world, collected together in my breast,
   For I know what has been, what in future will occur.
   I will supplicate my Lord that I get refuge in him,
   A regard I may obtain in his grace;
   The Son of Mary is my trust, great in him is my delight,
   For in him is the world continually upholden.
   God has been to instruct me and to raise my expectation,
   The true Creator of heaven, who affords me protection;
   It is rightly intended that the saints should daily pray,
   For God, the renovator, will bring them to him.”

And forthwith Elphin gave his haul to his wife, and she nursed him
tenderly and lovingly.  Thenceforward Elphin increased in riches more and
more day after day, and in love and favour with the king, and there abode
Taliesin until he was thirteen years old, when Elphin son of Gwyddno went
by a Christmas invitation to his uncle, Maelgwn Gwynedd, who some time
after this held open court at Christmastide in the castle of Dyganwy, for
all the number of his lords of both degrees, both spiritual and temporal,
with a vast and thronged host of knights and squires.  And amongst them
there arose a discourse and discussion.  And thus was it said.

“Is there in the whole world a king so great as Maelgwn, or one on whom
Heaven has bestowed so many spiritual gifts as upon him?  First, form,
and beauty, and meekness, and strength, besides all the powers of the
soul!”  And together with these they said that Heaven had given one gift
that exceeded all the others, which was the beauty, and comeliness, and
grace, and wisdom, and modesty of his queen; whose virtues surpassed
those of all the ladies and noble maidens throughout the whole kingdom.
And with this they put questions one to another amongst themselves: Who
had braver men?  Who had fairer or swifter horses or greyhounds?  Who had
more skilful or wiser bards—than Maelgwn?

Now at that time the bards were in great favour with the exalted of the
kingdom; and then none performed the office of those who are now called
heralds, unless they were learned men, not only expert in the service of
kings and princes, but studious and well versed in the lineage, and arms,
and exploits of princes and kings, and in discussions concerning foreign
kingdoms, and the ancient things of this kingdom, and chiefly in the
annals of the first nobles; and also were prepared always with their
answers in various languages, Latin, French, Welsh, and English.  And
together with this they were great chroniclers, and recorders, and
skilful in framing verses, and ready in making englyns in every one of
those languages.  Now of these there were at that feast within the palace
of Maelgwn as many as four-and-twenty, and chief of them all was one
named Heinin Vardd.

When they had all made an end of thus praising the king and his gifts, it
befell that Elphin spoke in this wise.  “Of a truth none but a king may
vie with a king; but were he not a king, I would say that my wife was as
virtuous as any lady in the kingdom, and also that I have a bard who is
more skilful than all the king’s bards.”  In a short space some of his
fellows showed the king all the boastings of Elphin; and the king ordered
him to be thrown into a strong prison, until he might know the truth as
to the virtues of his wife, and the wisdom of his bard.

Now when Elphin had been put in a tower of the castle, with a thick chain
about his feet (it is said that it was a silver chain, because he was of
royal blood), the king, as the story relates, sent his son Rhun to
inquire into the demeanour of Elphin’s wife.  Now Rhun was the most
graceless man in the world, and there was neither wife nor maiden with
whom he had held converse, but was evil spoken of.  While Rhun went in
haste towards Elphin’s dwelling, being fully minded to bring disgrace
upon his wife, Taliesin told his mistress how that the king had placed
his master in durance in prison, and how that Rhun was coming in haste to
strive to bring disgrace upon her.  Wherefore he caused his mistress to
array one of the maids of her kitchen in her apparel; which the noble
lady gladly did; and she loaded her hands with the best rings that she
and her husband possessed.

In this guise Taliesin caused his mistress to put the maiden to sit at
the board in her room at supper, and he made her to seem as her mistress,
and the mistress to seem as the maid.  And when they were in due time
seated at their supper in the manner that has been said, Rhun suddenly
arrived at Elphin’s dwelling, and was received with joy, for all the
servants knew him plainly; and they brought him in haste to the room of
their mistress, in the semblance of whom the maid rose up from supper and
welcomed him gladly.  And afterwards she sat down to supper again the
second time, and Rhun with her.  Then Rhun began jesting with the maid,
who still kept the semblance of her mistress.  And verily this story
shows that the maiden became so intoxicated, that she fell asleep; and
the story relates that it was a powder that Rhun put into the drink, that
made her sleep so soundly that she never felt it when he cut from off her
hand her little finger, whereupon was the signet ring of Elphin, which he
had sent to his wife as a token, a short time before.  And Rhun returned
to the king with the finger and the ring as a proof, to show that he had
cut it from off her hand, without her awaking from her sleep of
intemperance.

The king rejoiced greatly at these tidings, and he sent for his
councillors, to whom he told the whole story from the beginning.  And he
caused Elphin to be brought out of his prison, and he chided him because
of his boast.  And he spake unto Elphin on this wise.  “Elphin, be it
known to thee beyond a doubt that it is but folly for a man to trust in
the virtues of his wife further than he can see her; and that thou mayest
be certain of thy wife’s vileness, behold her finger, with thy signet
ring upon it, which was cut from her hand last night, while she slept the
sleep of intoxication.”  Then thus spake Elphin.  “With thy leave, mighty
king, I cannot deny my ring, for it is known of many; but verily I assert
strongly that the finger around which it is, was never attached to the
hand of my wife, for in truth and certainty there are three notable
things pertaining to it, none of which ever belonged to any of my wife’s
fingers.  The first of the three is, that it is certain, by your grace’s
leave, that wheresoever my wife is at this present hour, whether sitting,
or standing, or lying down, this ring would never remain upon her thumb,
whereas you can plainly see that it was hard to draw it over the joint of
the little finger of the hand whence this was cut; the second thing is,
that my wife has never let pass one Saturday since I have known her
without paring her nails before going to bed, and you can see fully that
the nail of this little finger has not been pared for a month.  The third
is, truly, that the hand whence this finger came was kneading rye dough
within three days before the finger was cut therefrom, and I can assure
your goodness that my wife has never kneaded rye dough since my wife she
has been.”

Then the king was mightily wroth with Elphin for so stoutly withstanding
him, respecting the goodness of his wife, wherefore he ordered him to his
prison a second time, saying that he should not be loosed thence until he
had proved the truth of his boast, as well concerning the wisdom of his
bard as the virtues of his wife.

In the meantime his wife and Taliesin remained joyful at Elphin’s
dwelling.  And Taliesin showed his mistress how that Elphin was in prison
because of them, but he bade her be glad, for that he would go to
Maelgwn’s court to free his master.  Then she asked him in what manner he
would set him free.  And he answered her:—

   “A journey will I perform,
   And to the gate I will come;
   The hall I will enter,
   And my song I will sing;
   My speech I will pronounce
   To silence royal bards,
   In presence of their chief,
   I will greet to deride,
   Upon them I will break
   And Elphin I will free.
   Should contention arise,
   In presence of the prince,
   With summons to the bards,
   For the sweet flowing song,
   And wizards’ posing lore
   And wisdom of Druids,
   In the court of the sons of the Distributor
   Some are who did appear
   Intent on wily schemes,
   By craft and tricking means,
   In pangs of affliction
   To wrong the innocent,
   Let the fools be silent,
   As erst in Badon’s fight,—
   With Arthur of liberal ones
   The head, with long red blades;
   Through feats of testy men,
   And a chief with his foes.
   Woe be to them, the fools,
   When revenge comes on them.
   I Taliesin, chief of bards,
   With a sapient Druid’s words,
   Will set kind Elphin free
   From haughty tyrant’s bonds.
   To their fell and chilling cry,
   By the act of a surprising steed,
   From the far distant North,
   There soon shall be an end.
   Let neither grace nor health
   Be to Maelgwn Gwynedd,
   For this force and this wrong;
   And be extremes of ills
   And an avenged end
   To Rhun and all his race:
   Short be his course of life,
   Be all his lands laid waste;
   And long exile be assigned
   To Maelgwn Gwynedd!”

After this he took leave of his mistress, and came at last to the Court
of Maelgwn, who was going to sit in his hall and dine in his royal state,
as it was the custom in those days for kings and princes to do at every
chief feast.  And as soon as Taliesin entered the hall, he placed himself
in a quiet corner, near the place where the bards and the minstrels were
wont to come in doing their service and duty to the king, as is the
custom at the high festivals when the bounty is proclaimed.  And so, when
the bards and the heralds came to cry largess, and to proclaim the power
of the king and his strength, at the moment that they passed by the
corner wherein he was crouching, Taliesin pouted out his lips after them,
and played “Blerwm, blerwm,” with his finger upon his lips.  Neither took
they much notice of him as they went by, but proceeded forward till they
came before the king, unto whom they made their obeisance with their
bodies, as they were wont, without speaking a single word, but pouting
out their lips, and making mouths at the king, playing “Blerwm, blerwm,”
upon their lips with their fingers, as they had seen the boy do
elsewhere.  This sight caused the king to wonder and to deem within
himself that they were drunk with many liquors.  Wherefore he commanded
one of his lords, who served at the board, to go to them and desire them
to collect their wits, and to consider where they stood, and what it was
fitting for them to do.  And this lord did so gladly.  But they ceased
not from their folly any more than before.  Whereupon he sent to them a
second time, and a third, desiring them to go forth from the hall.  At
the last the king ordered one of his squires to give a blow to the chief
of them named Heinin Vardd; and the squire took a broom and struck him on
the head, so that he fell back in his seat.  Then he arose and went on
his knees, and besought leave of the king’s grace to show that this their
fault was not through want of knowledge, neither through drunkenness, but
by the influence of some spirit that was in the hall.  And after this
Heinin spoke on this wise.  “Oh, honourable king, be it known to your
grace, that not from the strength of drink, or of too much liquor, are we
dumb, without power of speech like drunken men, but through the influence
of a spirit that sits in the corner yonder in the form of a child.”
Forthwith the king commanded the squire to fetch him; and he went to the
nook where Taliesin sat, and brought him before the king, who asked him
what he was, and whence he came.  And he answered the king in verse.

   “Primary chief bard am I to Elphin,
   And my original country is the region of the summer stars;
   Idno and Heinin called me Merddin,
   At length every king will call me Taliesin.

   I was with my Lord in the highest sphere,
   On the fall of Lucifer into the depth of hell
   I have borne a banner before Alexander;
   I know the names of the stars from north to south;
   I have been on the galaxy at the throne of the Distributor;
   I was in Canaan when Absalom was slain;
   I conveyed the Divine Spirit to the level of the vale of Hebron;
   I was in the court of Don before the birth of Gwdion.
   I was instructor to Eli and Enoc;
   I have been winged by the genius of the splendid crosier;
   I have been loquacious prior to being gifted with speech;
   I was at the place of the crucifixion of the merciful Son of God;
   I have been three periods in the prison of Arianrod;
   I have been the chief director of the work of the tower of Nimrod;
   I am a wonder whose origin is not known.
   I have been in Asia with Noah in the ark,
   I have seen the destruction of Sodom and Gomorra;
   I have been in India when Roma was built,
   I am now come here to the remnant of Troia.

   I have been with my Lord in the manger of the ass:
   I strengthened Moses through the water of Jordan;
   I have been in the firmament with Mary Magdalene;
   I have obtained the muse from the cauldron of Caridwen;
   I have been bard of the harp to Lleon of Lochlin.
   I have been on the White Hill, in the court of Cynvelyn,
   For a day and a year in stocks and fetters,
   I have suffered hunger for the Son of the Virgin,
   I have been fostered in the land of the Deity,
   I have been teacher to all intelligences,
   I am able to instruct the whole universe.
   I shall be until the day of doom on the face of the earth;
   And it is not known whether my body is flesh or fish.

      Then I was for nine months
      In the womb of the hag Caridwen;
      I was originally little Gwion,
      And at length I am Taliesin.”

And when the king and his nobles had heard the song, they wondered much,
for they had never heard the like from a boy so young as he.  And when
the king knew that he was the bard of Elphin, he bade Heinin, his first
and wisest bard, to answer Taliesin and to strive with him.  But when he
came, he could do no other but play “blerwm” on his lips; and when he
sent for the others of the four-and-twenty bards they all did likewise,
and could do no other.  And Maelgwn asked the boy Taliesin what was his
errand, and he answered him in song.

   “Puny bards, I am trying
   To secure the prize, if I can;
   By a gentle prophetic strain
   I am endeavouring to retrieve
   The loss I may have suffered;
   Complete the attempt I hope,
   Since Elphin endures trouble
   In the fortress of Teganwy,
   On him may there not be laid
   Too many chains and fetters;
   The Chair of the fortress of Teganwy
   Will I again seek;
   Strengthened by my muse I am powerful;
   Mighty on my part is what I seek,
   For three hundred songs and more
   Are combined in the spell I sing.
   There ought not to stand where I am
   Neither stone, neither ring;
   And there ought not to be about me
   Any bard who may not know
   That Elphin the son of Gwyddno
   Is in the land of Artro,
   Secured by thirteen locks,
   For praising his instructor;
   And then I Taliesin,
   Chief of the bards of the west,
   Shall loosen Elphin
   Out of a golden fetter.”

                                  * * * * *

   “If you be primary bards
   To the master of sciences,
   Declare ye mysteries
   That relate to the inhabitants of the world;
   There is a noxious creature,
   From the rampart of Satanas,
   Which has overcome all
   Between the deep and the shallow;
   Equally wide are his jaws
   As the mountains of the Alps;
   Him death will not subdue,
   Nor hand or blades;
   There is the load of nine hundred wagons
   In the hair of his two paws;
   There is in his head an eye
   Green as the limpid sheet of icicle;
   Three springs arise
   In the nape of his neck;
   Sea-roughs thereon
   Swim through it;
   There was the dissolution of the oxen
   Of Deivrdonwy the water-gifted.
   The names of the three springs
   From the midst of the ocean;
   One generated brine
   Which is from the Corina,
   To replenish the flood
   Over seas disappearing;
   The second, without injury
   It will fall on us,
   When there is rain abroad,
   Through the whelming sky;
   The third will appear
   Through the mountain veins,
   Like a flinty banquet,
   The work of the King of kings,
   You are blundering bards,
   In too much solicitude;
   You cannot celebrate
   The kingdom of the Britons;
   And I am Taliesin,
   Chief of the bards of the west,
   Who will loosen Elphin
   Out of the golden fetter.”

                                  * * * * *

   “Be silent, then, ye unlucky rhyming bards,
   For you cannot judge between truth and falsehood.
   If you be primary bards formed by heaven,
   Tell your king what his fate will be.
   It is I who am a diviner and a leading bard,
   And know every passage in the country of your king;
   I shall liberate Elphin from the belly of the stony tower;
   And will tell your king what will befall him.
   A most strange creature will come from the sea marsh of Rhianedd
   As a punishment of iniquity on Maelgwn Gwynedd;
   His hair, his teeth, and his eyes being as gold,
   And this will bring destruction upon Maelgwn Gwynedd.”

                                  * * * * *

   “Discover thou what is
   The strong creature from before the flood,
   Without flesh, without bone,
   Without vein, without blood,
   Without head, without feet,
   It will neither be older nor younger
   Than at the beginning;
   For fear of a denial,
   There are no rude wants
   With creatures.
   Great God! how the sea whitens
   When first it comes!
   Great are its gusts
   When it comes from the south;
   Great are its evaporations
   When it strikes on coasts.
   It is in the field, it is in the wood,
   Without hand, and without foot,
   Without signs of old age,
   Though it be co-æval
   With the five ages or periods
   And older still,
   Though they be numberless years.
   It is also so wide
   As the surface of the earth;
   And it was not born,
   Nor was it seen.
   It will cause consternation
   Wherever God willeth.
   On sea, and on land,
   It neither sees, nor is seen.
   Its course is devious,
   And will not come when desired;
   On land and on sea,
   It is indispensable.
   It is without an equal,
   It is four-sided;
   It is not confined,
   It is incomparable;
   It comes from four quarters;
   It will not be advised,
   It will not be without advice.
   It commences its journey
   Above the marble rock,
   It is sonorous, it is dumb,
   It is mild,
   It is strong, it is bold,
   When it glances over the land,
   It is silent, it is vocal,
   It is clamorous,
   It is the most noisy
   On the face of the earth.
   It is good, it is bad,
   It is extremely injurious.
   It is concealed,
   Because sight cannot perceive it.
   It is noxious, it is beneficial;
   It is yonder, it is here;
   It will discompose,
   But will not repair the injury;
   It will not suffer for its doings,
   Seeing it is blameless.
   It is wet, it is dry,
   It frequently comes,
   Proceeding from the heat of the sun,
   And the coldness of the moon.
   The moon is less beneficial,
   Inasmuch as her heat is less.
   One Being has prepared it,
   Out of all creatures,
   By a tremendous blast,
   To wreak vengeance
   On Maelgwn Gwynedd.”

And while he was thus singing his verse near the door, there arose a
mighty storm of wind, so that the king and all his nobles thought that
the castle would fall on their heads.  And the king caused them to fetch
Elphin in haste from his dungeon, and placed him before Taliesin.  And it
is said, that immediately he sang a verse, so that the chains opened from
about his feet.

   “I adore the Supreme, Lord of all animation,—
   Him that supports the heavens, Ruler of every extreme,
   Him that made the water good for all,
   Him who has bestowed each gift, and blesses it;—
   May abundance of mead be given Maelgwn of Anglesey, who supplies us,
   From his foaming meadhorns, with the choicest pure liquor.
   Since bees collect, and do not enjoy,
   We have sparkling distilled mead, which is universally praised.
   The multitude of creatures which the earth nourishes
   God made for man, with a view to enrich him;—
   Some are violent, some are mute, he enjoys them,
   Some are wild, some are tame; the Lord makes them;—
   Part of their produce becomes clothing;
   For food and beverage till doom will they continue.
   I entreat the Supreme, Sovereign of the region of peace,
   To liberate Elphin from banishment,
   The man who gave me wine, and ale, and mead,
   With large princely steeds, of beautiful appearance;
   May he yet give me; and at the end,
   May God of his good will grant me, in honour,
   A succession of numberless ages, in the retreat of tranquillity.
   Elphin, knight of mead, late be thy dissolution!”

And afterwards he sang the ode which is called “The Excellence of the
Bards.”

   “What was the first man
   Made by the God of heaven;
   What the fairest flattering speech
   That was prepared by leuav;
   What meat, what drink,
   What roof his shelter;
   What the first impression
   Of his primary thinking;
   What became his clothing;
   Who carried on a disguise,
   Owing to the wilds of the country,
   In the beginning?
   Wherefore should a stone be hard;
   Why should a thorn be sharp-pointed?
   Who is hard like a flint;
   Who is salt like brine;
   Who sweet like honey;
   Who rides on the gale;
   Why ridged should be the nose;
   Why should a wheel be round;
   Why should the tongue be gifted with speech
   Rather than another member?
   If thy bards, Heinin, be competent,
   Let them reply to me, Taliesin.”

And after that he sang the address which is called “The Reproof of the
Bards.”

   “If thou art a bard completely imbued
   With genius not to be controlled,
   Be thou not untractable
   Within the court of thy king;
   Until thy rigmarole shall be known,
   Be thou silent, Heinin,
   As to the name of thy verse,
   And the name of thy vaunting;
   And as to the name of thy grandsire
   Prior to his being baptized.
   And the name of the sphere,
   And the name of the element,
   And the name of thy language,
   And the name of thy region.
   Avaunt, ye bards above,
   Avaunt, ye bards below!
   My beloved is below,
   In the fetter of Ariansod
   It is certain you know not
   How to understand the song I utter,
   Nor clearly how to discriminate
   Between the truth and what is false;
   Puny bards, crows of the district,
   Why do you not take to flight?
   A bard that will not silence me,
   Silence may he not obtain,
   Till he goes to be covered
   Under gravel and pebbles;
   Such as shall listen to me,
   May God listen to him.”

Then sang he the piece called “The Spite of the Bards.”

   “Minstrels persevere in their false custom,
   Immoral ditties are their delight;
   Vain and tasteless praise they recite;
   Falsehood at all times do they utter;
   The innocent persons they ridicule;
   Married women they destroy,
   Innocent virgins of Mary they corrupt;
   As they pass their lives away in vanity,
   Poor innocent persons they ridicule;
   At night they get drunk, they sleep the day;
   In idleness without work they feed themselves;
   The Church they hate, and the tavern they frequent;
   With thieves and perjured fellows they associate;
   At courts they inquire after feasts;
   Every senseless word they bring forward;
   Every deadly sin they praise;
   Every vile course of life they lead;
   Through every village, town, and country they stroll;
   Concerning the gripe of death they think not;
   Neither lodging nor charity do they give;
   Indulging in victuals to excess.
   Psalms or prayers they do not use,
   Tithes or offerings to God they do not pay,
   On holidays or Sundays they do not worship;
   Vigils or festivals they do not heed.
   The birds do fly, the fish do swim,
   The bees collect honey, worms do crawl,
   Every thing travails to obtain its food,
   Except minstrels and lazy useless thieves.

   I deride neither song nor minstrelsy,
   For they are given by God to lighten thought;
   But him who abuses them,
   For blaspheming Jesus and his service.”

Taliesin having set his master free from prison, and having protected the
innocence of his wife, and silenced the Bards, so that not one of them
dared to say a word, now brought Elphin’s wife before them, and showed
that she had not one finger wanting.  Right glad was Elphin, right glad
was Taliesin.

Then he bade Elphin wager the king, that he had a horse both better and
swifter than the king’s horses.  And this Elphin did, and the day, and
the time, and the place were fixed, and the place was that which at this
day is called Morva Rhiannedd: and thither the king went with all his
people, and four-and-twenty of the swiftest horses he possessed.  And
after a long process the course was marked, and the horses were placed
for running.  Then came Taliesin with four-and-twenty twigs of holly,
which he had burnt black, and he caused the youth who was to ride his
master’s horse to place them in his belt, and he gave him orders to let
all the king’s horses get before him, and as he should overtake one horse
after the other, to take one of the twigs and strike the horse with it
over the crupper, and then let that twig fall; and after that to take
another twig, and do in like manner to every one of the horses, as he
should overtake them, enjoining the horseman strictly to watch when his
own horse should stumble, and to throw down his cap on the spot.  All
these things did the youth fulfil, giving a blow to every one of the
king’s horses, and throwing down his cap on the spot where his horse
stumbled.  And to this spot Taliesin brought his master after his horse
had won the race.  And he caused Elphin to put workmen to dig a hole
there; and when they had dug the ground deep enough, they found a large
cauldron full of gold.  And then said Taliesin, “Elphin, behold a payment
and reward unto thee, for having taken me out of the weir, and for having
reared me from that time until now.”  And on this spot stands a pool of
water, which is to this time called Pwllbair.

After all this, the king caused Taliesin to be brought before him, and he
asked him to recite concerning the creation of man from the beginning;
and thereupon he made the poem which is now called “One of the Four
Pillars of Song.”

   “The Almighty made,
   Down the Hebron vale,
   With his plastic hands,
      Adam’s fair form:

   And five hundred years,
   Void of any help,
   There he remained and lay
      Without a soul.

   He again did form,
   In calm paradise,
   From a left-side rib,
      Bliss-throbbing Eve.

   Seven hours they were
   The orchard keeping,
   Till Satan brought strife,
      With wiles from hell.

   Thence were they driven,
   Cold and shivering,
   To gain their living,
      Into this world.

   To bring forth with pain
   Their sons and daughters,
   To have possession
      Of Asia’s land.

   Twice five, ten and eight,
   She was self-bearing,
   The mixed burden
      Of man-woman.

   And once, not hidden,
   She brought forth Abel,
   And Cain the forlorn,
      The homicide.

   To him and his mate
   Was given a spade,
   To break up the soil,
      Thus to get bread.

   The wheat pure and white,
   Summer tilth to sow,
   Every man to feed,
      Till great yule feast.

   An angelic hand
   From the high Father,
   Brought seed for growing
      That Eve might sow;

   But she then did hide
   Of the gift a tenth,
   And all did not sow
      Of what was dug.

   Black rye then was found,
   And not pure wheat grain,
   To show the mischief
      Thus of thieving.

   For this thievish act,
   It is requisite,
   That all men should pay
      Tithe unto God.

   Of the ruddy wine,
   Planted on sunny days,
   And on new-moon nights;
      And the white wine.

   The wheat rich in grain
   And red flowing wine
   Christ’s pure body make,
      Son of Alpha.

   The wafer is flesh,
   The wine is spilt blood,
   The Trinity’s words
      Sanctify them.

   The concealed books
   From Emmanuel’s hand
   Were brought by Raphael
      As Adam’s gift,

   When in his old age,
   To his chin immersed
   In Jordan’s water,
      Keeping a fast,

   Moses did obtain
   In Jordan’s water,
   The aid of the three
      Most special rods.

   Solomon did obtain
   In Babel’s tower,
   All the sciences
      In Asia land.

   So did I obtain,
   In my bardic books,
   All the sciences
      Of Europe and Africa.

   Their course, their bearing,
   Their permitted way,
   And their fate I know,
      Unto the end.

   Oh! what misery,
   Through extreme of woe,
   Prophecy will show
      On Troia’s race!

   A coiling serpent
   Proud and merciless,
   On her golden wings,
      From Germany.

   She will overrun
   England and Scotland,
   From Lychlyn sea-shore
      To the Severn.

   Then will the Brython
   Be as prisoners,
   By strangers swayed,
      From Saxony.

   Their Lord they will praise,
   Their speech they will keep,
   Their land they will lose,
      Except wild Walia.

   Till some change shall come,
   After long penance,
   When equally rife
      The two crimes come.

   Britons then shall have
   Their land and their crown,
   And the stranger swarm
      Shall disappear.

   All the angel’s words,
   As to peace and war,
   Will be fulfilled
      To Britain’s race.”

He further told the king various prophecies of things that should be in
the world, in songs, as follows.

